
Skip to main content

    Sign up for free
    Log in

Search metadata
Search text contents
Search TV news captions
Search radio transcripts
Search archived web sites
Advanced Search

    About Blog Events Projects Help Donate Contact Jobs Volunteer 

Full text of "A Review Of The History And Works Of The Hindu Mahasabha And The Hindu Sanghatan Movement"
See other formats




A REYIIW 

OF THE HISTORY WORK OF THE 

HINDU MAHASABHA 

AND 

THE HINDU SANGHATAN MOVEMENT 




BY 

INDRA PRAKASH 



PUBLISHED BY 

THE AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU MAHASADll.' 

NEW DELHI. 


DECBMBBR 1938 



CONTENTS 


Introduction : 

By Veer V. D. SavarJcar 

Foreword : 

By B/iai Par/ninanda 

I face : 

By Di\ B. S, Mooiije 
1 mi 

By Seth Juqal Ki shore Birla 

History of the Hindu Alaliasabha 

F^xtracts from the Addresses of 
our Presidents. 

Some of the Important Resolutions. 
From 1918 — 1937. 

A Brief History and Workiiiii; of 
our Provincial Hindu Sabhas. 

The Communal Award an<l the 
Hindu Mahasabha. 

The Funds and the Properties of 
the Hindu Mahasabha. 

Our Pan— Hindu National Flag 

Life Sketches of our Presidents 



The Growth of the Hindu Youth 


Movement in Hindusthan. 

The Shuddhi Movement in 

399 

Hindusthan 

409 

The Bhonsala Military School 

4l9 

Rashtriya Swayamsewak Sangh 

425 

Cow Protection in Hindusthan 

427 

The Hindu Sewa Ashram 

432 

Appendix 1 

435 

Appendix 11 

436 

Appendix 111 

43« 





INTRODUCTION 


In persaance of a resolution of the Work- 
ing Committee of the Hindu Maha Sabha 
Mr. Indra Prakash is brineing out this Volume 
as a retrospect of the work done by and a pass- 
ing review of the beginning and growth of the 
Hindu Maha Sabha up-to-date. The bock is 
also meant to serve as a bird’s eye view of the 
Hindu Sanghatan Movement itself. , 

In order to ascertain the causes, motives and 
spread of the Hindu Sanghatan Movement as a 
wliole some parts of the speeches of the dis- 
tinguished Hindu leaders who presided over the 
Maha Sabha from time to time are reproduced 
in tlie Volume. Two special articles from the 
pens of two of tlie foremost champions of the 
Hindu cause, Bhai Parmanand and Dr. Moonje, 
are also added by way of introduction in order 
to elucidate further the different view points 
from which leaders of Hindu thought and action 
survey and apprize the aitns. obiecl<j .and worlr 



( n ) 


of the Hindu Maha Sabha and the Hindu 
i^anghatan Movement as well. 

It must, however^ be borne in mind that the 
individual views of the leaders of the Maha- 
sabha or of the Hindu Sanghatan Movement in 
general, cannot be taken to be identical with 
the corporate view of the Hindu Maha Sabha 
itself. The corporate aim, object and out-look 
of the Maha Sabha as a body at any given time 
can only be ascertained through the resolutions 
passed at its Annual Session, and authorized 
Committees representing it from time to time. 

Another point to which we-w4efe-to draw the 
attention of the readers of this short sketch of 
of the History of the Maha Sabha and its work, 
is the fact that a living institution like an 
individual grows in thought and activity as 
time passes on. As on the one hand it must be 
borne in mind that the cradle serves well for a 
baby so on the other hand this also cannot be 
denied that it would be foolish to persist in 
keeping the lad couped and cabinned in the 
cradle even when it has out-grown its infancy. 
The infantile creeds of institutions, like cradles, 
and its activities like those of a baby howsoever 



I ) 


narrow and ridiculously limil.ed they may seem 
to the later age, are quite likely to have been 
of grer»t use in nestling it and inevitably 
natural to its infancy. But all the same they 
may contribute to dwarf its growth and hamper 
its expanding ambitions and activities later on. 
An Institution, therefore, must expand its 
infant creed, out-look and policy from time to 
time to respond and adapt itself to the changes 
in circumstances and environments which time 
in its onward march inevitably brings about. 
It is, therefore, a matter for congratulation that 
the Hindu Maha Sabha also has never hesitated 
to refuse to get itself crippled by persisting tfi 
be circumscribed by the limits which, howso- 
ever beneficial or inevitable they might have 
been in its infancy, ceased to respond to and 
accommodate themselves with its expanding 
activity and growth. Consequently the mali- 
cious folly that tries to disparage the fortitude 
with which the Hindu Maha Sabha has stepped 
forward to-day to shoulder the gigantic res- 
ponsibilities involved in fulfilment of its mission 
of the regeneration of the Hindu Race in all 
spheres of life whether religious, social or poli- 



( IV ) 


tical by pointing out to its infantile cieeds or 
policies or stray utterances of some of its early 
leaders here or there, is as ridiculous and mean 
as an attempt to belittle a Herculian wrestler 
who enters the Marathon competition merely 
pointing out to the fact that he used to crawl 
on all fours in days of his early infancy. 

Let us cast a glance by way nf illuftration 
on the beginning and the growth of the Indian 
Congress itself. It did not leap out all of a 
sudden like a Veerbhadra fully grown, equipped 
and armed out of the wrath of some T.ord 
Rudra, some angry God. Lhe Congress move- 
ment also had to be cradled in infantile creeds, 
kept crawling, indulged in silly babbling before 
it came to age. The Presidential addresses 
during first half-a-dozen sessions of the Nation- 
al Congress swore by its abiding faith in the 
bonafides of the British people, its loyalty to 
the British Rule and prayed for the perma- 
nance of the British sovereignty and suzerainty 
over India. It claimed to, meant to strengthen 
the ties that bound India to the British Empire. 
Even so late as the year 1916 the Congress 
Session at Lucknow sang the British National 



i V ) 


anthem and flew the Union Jack, the British 
Flag, as a token of its faith in the beneficial 
mission of Great Britain in India. How vividly 
we remember the meetings in London during 
1909 and 1910 when Gandhiji used to jump up 
to his feet in all reverence as soon as the tune 
“God save the King” was struck np and kept 
denouncing the “Abliinava Bharat” revo- 
lutionary youtl)s when they refused to stand up 
and pay homage to tlie Alien anthem. During 
the Great Anglo-German \A'ar did not the 
Gandhist Congressites serve as recruiting 
agents to the British Government ? Their 
Ahimsa and Satya did not stand in their way 
in inciting Indian sepoys to shoot the Germans 
straight off in the interest of the British Em- 
pire. There was a period when the name of 
thd Congress w'as but a synoiiym for political 
timidity and toadyism. But will that all justify 
any one to deny the National services the 
Congress has as an institution and on the whole 
rendered to our country throughout its career 
or the patriotic motive that actuated it as an 
institution even when some of its leaders erred ? 
It only exemplifies the soupd tenet of just 



r*ritifvisra that no institution should be judged 
in its totality by merely pointing out to any 
passing phase of its actixdty or any treacherous 
or erring action or word on the part of its 
stray leaders here or there. Nor could it be, 
on the other hand^ called upon to halt its 
progressive march by reference to its infant 
creeds or limits and policies it has grown in 
response to larger and newer responsibilities 
which its growing strength enablss it to 
shoulder towards the fulfilment of the mission 
of its life. 

The present Volume does not clnirn to be an 
exhaustive history of the Hindn Tvrahasal)ha, 
Movement. But it will be seen even from this 
passing survey of the fMovement how the 
Hindu Mahasabha, has ceaselessly served the 
Hindu Commuuity and in fact has proved 
to be the only faithful guardian of interests 
and rights of Hindudom as a whole. It 
is doubtless due to the continuous struggle 
which the Maha Sabha carried on according to 
its light and might and the strenuous work its 
leaders and followers did that Hindudom has 
been spared from still more fearful damages 



( VII ) 


than ifc has already been aubjeefced to and sa\'ed 
it from the vii-ulance of non-Hindu onslaughts 
which would otherwise have proved more 
disastrous than they have already been. In 
fact it was the Maha Sablia alone which has 
roused tlie Pan-Hindu consciousness tiirough- 
out the length and breadth of India and outside 
and made the different sects, castes and creeds 
feel as Hindus, a Nation by themselves, as kith 
and kin with -one another bound together by 
the dearest corporate ties of a common race, a 
common coujitr}", a common language, a 
common culture, a common past and a common 
future, having friends in common ani foes in 
common. 

I-Cven this single achievement is enough to 
Justify its existence and utility and lays a 
foundation strong enough to bear the weight 
of a free and mighty Hindu Nation that niay 
be raised on it by generations to come. From 
its watch-tower the Mahasabha scented the 
danger ahead which threatened the very exist- 
ence of Hindudom, sounded the alarm bell and 
roused the Hindu Community from its age-long 
stupor, taught it to distinguish a friend from a 



( Tin ) 


foe and infused it with a pulsatiner urge to be 
up and doing in defence of ifs Religion and 
Race, Culture and Country. It is an achieve- 
ment by itself. The song that nerves a 
Nation’s heart is in itself a deed. 

Apart from this fundamental achieA’^ement, 
even the practical and detailed work, the 
Hindu Mahasabha has done through the short 
span of time since it came into an organised 
existence, will no doubt prove an agreeable 
surprise to every patriotic Hindu when he 
surveys it in its collective form in this short 
report of it. The latter half of this Volume 
is devoted to tabulate in a nut-shell the activi- 
ties of the Maha Sabha through the network 

N . 

of its various branches. The numerous commit- 
tees, representations, deputations, inquiries, 
strenuous efforts to do away with untouchabi- 
lity and such other disintegrating evils that 
have kept corroding the solidarity of the 
Hindu Race for ages in the past, the numbers 
of Shuddhis already performed, the facing 
and fighting out the onslaughts of non-Hindu 
aggression during riots and attacks by force 
or fraud against the Hindus and such other 



manifold activities which the Hindu Mahasabha 
ca tried on throughout these years in co-opera- 
tion of all other allied Hindu Sanghatanist 
institutions and organizations, are bound to 
prove an eye-opener to the cavelling question 
wliich impertinently and ungratefully asks in 
sf^ason and out of season ‘’’what has the Hindu 
Maltasabha or the, Hindu Sangliatan Movemetit 
dene in defending the cause of the Hindus ?"' 
The proverbial- shortness of mass memory and 
the mean attempt to suppress and distort 
the nows about the Hindu Sangliatan acti- 
vities on tlu' part of the so-called National 
Congr( ssite press have been in the main 
responsible for this ignorant or interest- 
ed cavil. 

To these carping critics the conspectus of 
tiio detailed work of the Mahasabha and other 
Snnghatanist bo-lies wliich the latter part of 
this book provides, cannot fail to serve as a 
belittittg rol>uff. On the other hand the fact 
tliat so much detailed work as shown in the 
conspectus could already be done under such 
adverse circumstances by the Hindu Sanglia- 
tKtnists in 20 years time is bound to stimuJat,e 



( X ) 


many a self-diffident Sanghatanist to work on 
with redoubled hope and vigour. 

Of this detailed work the most outstandinir 
fact to be noted is a change that is brought 
about by the Arya Samaj and Hindu Mahasabha 
in the mental attitude of the Hindu Community, 
in gen‘^ral, in favour of the Suddhi Movement. 
In a suicidal fit, ages ago, the Hindus set their 
face sternly against their prozelitising activity 
and put a ban even on reclaiming those of their 
kith and kin who had fallen in the clutches of 
Alien faiths. This bar on 'Suddhi and Dharma- 
prachar even in the face of a clash with Christi- 
anity and especially with the most verulent and 
unscruplously prozelitising Islamic faith has 
been the factor most responsible for the terrible 
decrease in the population of the Hindus in 
their own land as well as abroad. It was not 
only a question of contributing to a set of 
religious dogmas this way or that. The conver- 
sion of a Hindu to an Alien faith like Islam 
was not only a religious but a cultural and 
racial alienation from the Hindu fold of turn- 
ing a cognate friend into a bitter alien foe, — 
it was a National loss to spelling disaster to the 



( XI ) 

National existence of Hindudom. It is the 
realisation of this aspect of religious conversion 
of the Hindus to Alien faiths that shocked 
Swami Shraddhanand and convinced him that 
unless checked in time this proccess of Alien 
prozehtisation was sure to exterminate Hindn- 
dom even as a Race and a Nation within a 
couple of centuries to come. 

Moreover it must clearly be recognized by 
the Hindus that today the political power in 
democracies in the world hinges more and more 
on the census, the population strength of a 
community. And the population strength of 
the Hinilus, other things being eqric.l, must 
depend in the main on the Suddhi Movement, 
i. e. on the proportion in which the Hindus 
succeed in stopping the dreailful conversion 
activities of the Alien faiths and in acceleraticg 
the reclamation of the alienated numbers back 
to the Hindu fold. IN A COUNTRY LIKE 
INDIA WHERE A RELIOIOUS UNIT 
TENDS INEVITABLY TO GROW INTO 
A CULTURAL AND NATIONAL UNIT, 
SUDDHI MOVEMENT CEASES TO BE 
MERELY THEOLOGICAL OR DOGMATIC 



( XII ) 


ONE, BUT ASSUMES THE WIDEB SIONT- 
FICANCE OF A POLITICAL AND NATION- 
AL MOVEMENT. If the Moslems increase 
in population, the centre of political power is 
bound to be shifted in their favour, as it has 
already done in some of the provinces in India. 
And wherever they dominate in number the 
treacherous cry is raised to partition India and 
to betray a part of it to Aliens outside India, 
to form a Pakistan-^ non-Indian federation, 
a pan- Islamic state and so on. Even those who 
fancy themselves of being merely ‘Indians' and 
are only enamoured of tlie hollow contents of a 
territorial Patriotism, of Ind'a as a country in 
the sense of merely a geographical unit, will 
also do well to remember that the Suddhi Move- 
ment cannot but contribute to the defence of 
the political integrity and solidarity of India as 
a country and as an independent state. But the 
Hindus being the bedrock of the Indian na tion 
itself, anything that contributes to lessen their 
collective strengh is sure to lessen the National 
and Political strength of India too, to tighten 
the grip of the Alien rule that holds India in 
subjection today or to expose India and betray 



( ) 

her to any Alien and non-Indian Moslem 
aggression in future. 

Viewed in this light the Siddhi and 
the Hindu Singhatan Movement cannot but 
have a genuinely national significance even in 
the eyes of those who pride themselves on 
being only ‘Indian Patriots’ in a territorial 
sense alone. 

But whether.the so-called territorial patriots 
think such wise or not — to the Hindus at any 
rate the Suddhi Movement is not only a 
religious or dogmatic necessity but is in the 
main a political and national necessity. That 
is why the success that the Hindu Sangathan 
Movement has achieved in bringing about a 
change in the mental attitude of the Hindu 
Community in favour of the Suddhi Move- 
ment during the last twenty years or so must 
be ranked as significant. It is a matter for 
congratulations that even our Sanatani brothers 
have given up their deadly opposition to the 
Suddhi Movement which they honestly suspect- 
ed of being a subvertive and irreligious activity 
in its beginnihg but have later on realized to be 
an inevitable necessity as a means of self- 



( XIV ) 


pt’oii=^ction if the Hindus wanted to maintain 
their no meri cal strength undiminished and even 
ever on the increase. It is hoped that our 
Sanatani brethren will even endorse and lead 
the Sudd hi Movement in all enthusiasm 
before long. 

Apart from this theoritical side of the Suddhi 

even the practical efforts and results in that 

direction are also very encouraging when we 

take into consideration the serious difficulties 

and all-sided opposition the workers had to 

face in its initial period as will be seen in the 

Chapter devoted in this book showing tlie 

numbers of recoyersions to Hindudom. 'I'be 

achievements of Masurasliram of Satara which 

has reclaimed some ten thousand Hindus in 

Gromantak who were mostly forcibly converted 

to Christianity in the days of Portuguese 

fanaticism or the activities of the Ratnagiri 

Hindu Sabha which has almost freed the whole 

district from the'prozelitising pestilence of the 

Moulvies and the Missionaries who had held the 
% 

district in their grip for some half a century in 
the past and several such other notable records 
of Saddliis on the part of other Sanghatanist 



( XV ) 


institutions all over India which are tabled in 
that separate Chapter of this book are telling 
enough, even though the list is by no means 
exhaustive, to prove that much spade work in 
the field of the Suddhi Movement is already 
done. It is hoped that this spade work c.annot 
but fascilitate and accelerate further effoits in 
that direction. It has sounded and found out 
the immense possibilities and fertile fields invi- 
ting tremendous* efforts in future. 1'he realiza- 
tion of the immense work .still to be done is in 
itself an important piece of work done. 

This Volume is not only meant to serve as 
a sketch of the History and work of the Hindu 
Mahasabha as an institution by itself but aims 
along with that to record, however briefly 
and meagerly it may be, the efforts and the 
results of the work done by all those institu- 
tions, associations, missions, samajas, ashramas 
etc. which have been striving in the cause of 
Hindu Sanghatan. All these blindu Sangha- 
tanist institutions, even though they be not 
formally affiliated to each other, are still allied 
with one another in the common cause. All 
of them aim at the regeneration of the Hindu 



( XVI j 


Race moulding it into a free and mighty lljudii 
Nation. Any work done by any one of th<^m 
in the interest of that common cause cannot 
but strengthen the mission of the restand must 
therefore be a matter for common congratuhi' 
tion. With this view we have tried to collect 
some information of as many Sanghatanist 
Institutions as under the circumstances we 
could approach and incorporate it in a chapter 
of this volume along with the reports of the 
different branches of the Hindu Mahasabha, 
crediting the work of each to the name of that 
particular institution. It must be mentioned 
here with regret that the limit of time and pau- 
city of means prevented us from approaching 
many institutions which are working in the field 
of Hindu Sanghatan and in cases even when we 
tried our best to gather information, some of 
them failed to supply us with it. Space and 
cost again did not allow us to do full justice to 
the reports of different bodies and forced us to 
cull out only some leading items and incorpo- 
rate them in this book. This being the first 
attempt ever made on such a wide out-look, we 
could not succeed in unearthing details about 



( XVII ) 

the hi'itory of the Hindu Mahasabha itself as in 
many ca<!es it was found tliat the old records 
were either not kept or were Inst. However, 
when new editions of this volume come to be 
publislied it would then be comparatively easy 
to make further additions and corrections and 
whatever short-comings liave inevitably crept 
in this book would easily be removed, 

or all the institutions which are referrt'd to 
above as being allied witli the Hindu Malia- 
sabha in the common cause of the Hindu 
Sanghatau Movement, the Arya Samaj must 
rank as being not only the first bnt the fore- 
most advocate of the Hindu Cause. The Hindu 
Maha Sabha itself is in fact but an enlarged and 
more comprehensive edition of the Arya Samaj. 
The honour of being the first apostle of Hindu 
Sanghatan in modern days must ever rest with 
Swami Dayanand Saraswati, the illustrious 
founder of the Arya Samaj Movement. It is 
no wonder therefore to find that the Arya 
Samaj and the Hindu Maha Sabha today are 
almost identified with each other in their acti- 
vities and more often than not the same set of 
loaders and missionaries arc leading, directing 



( wr.'i ) 


and worJvino; the Hindn Sibhas a,« well af? tii(? 
Arya Samajs at; many a, local and provincial 
CPiitre in India. 

Even the spade-work as detailed out in this 
Ueportj was not a walk over a bed of roses, 
l^he Hindu Sanghatanists had to face the 
apathy on the part of crores of the unn wakened 
masses of their coreligionists on the. one hand 
and on the other the treacherous attitude of the 
pseudo-Nationalist Hindus who are friends of 
every other community in the world but their 
own and who are ever ready to hetray even 
the just interest , of the Hindus and to placate 
the Moslems even in the most anti-natinivd 
demands on their part — just to pror^e that the 
Indian patriotism of these pseudo-Nationah'sf.s 
like Ceazer’s wife was above suspicion. I’lius 
unaided and betra3^ed at homo^ tlie brave Ijnnd 
of the Hindu Sanghatanist leaders and mission- 
aries had to facp outside the crganisad opu.si- 
tion of the Christian Missionaries on the one 
hand and the fanatical ijots^ hooliganism, 
assaults and assasinatiojis of the Moslem fana- 
ticism on the other — while the British tJovern- 
ment out of its Political hostility to iht' Hindus 



( ) 


was sworn never to take the side of tlie Hindus 
whenever Hindu iute»est clashed witJi the 
interest of the traditional ‘^h’avoured wile'’ of 
tlie Britisl). Thousands of the Hindu Sangli- 
atanists had tlius to face incarceiations^ trans- 
poi tations, gallows^ the fanatical daggers of the 
vnunlerers — but they kept on the fight and 
did not surrender the Hindu banner. All glory 
to th(«e pioneers, martyrs, fighters and workers 
who defended 'the Hindu Cause which the 
Hindu Mahasabha represented and enabled the 
Hindu Sanghatan Movement to assert itself as 
a factor in Indian Tolitics which no one can 
safely neglect. 

If the Hindu Mahasabha could not w'ork 
still more effectively — the fault lies* with the 
majority of the Hindus. 'I’ake for example the 
most suicidal mistake the Hindu Electorates had 
committed in the last elections to the. Councils. 
Disregarding the stern warning of the Hindu 
Mahasabha the Hindus voted for those pseudo 
Nationalists referred to above as their represen- 
tatives, who were bound to the Congress pledge 
and whose policy is notoriously anti-Hindu, 
disgracefully pro-Moslem and consequently 



( XX ) 


disastrously anti-national, I’liese Congress 
candidates are not ashamed of subscribing 
themselves as Hindus in the election season, 
that is, in that season they do not think 
communal to own themselves as Hindus. For 
otherwise they would not be eligible to stand 
as candidates at all and get elected on Hindu 
votes. But as soon as the elections are over 
and they have raised themselves to posts in the 
Councils and the Ministries on the strength of 
Hindu votes, they disown their Hinduness, 
condemn Hindu 0rgani7;ations like the Hindu 
Maha Sabha as Communal while keep dancing 
attendance on the most fanatical and anti- 
national Moslem organizations as the Moslem 
Ijeague, Witness for exam pie, the instructions 
issued by the Bengal Provinci.al Congre.ss inspir- 
ed by Mr. Subhas Chandra Bose himself that 
Congress Hindus in Bengal should not agitate 
against the so-called Communal Award; or the 
action of the Congress party in Bengal l^egis- 
latnre which practically supported Mr. Fazlul 
Haq’s outrageous bill to reserve 60 " o services 
for Moslems ! Why, Mr. Sarat Chandra Bose 
and his Congress party dared to betray Hindu 



( XXI ) 

interest in that treacherous fashion only 
because the Hindu Electorate, they were sure, 
would not take them to task. But if the 
Hindus will determine to vote only for these 
men who stood on the Mahasabha Hindu 
ticket and refuse to vote in future for those 
pseudo Nationalist Congress ('andidates — the 
( 'ongress will come to its senses in a day ! For 
the simple reason that not a single ('ongress 
('andidate would be elected by the Hindu 
Electorate as a punisliment for their betraying 
the cause of the Hindus who sent them to the 
Council or Municipality or Board to represent 
the Hindu interest. The Moslem Electorate 
returns only those Moslems who are openly 
pledged to defend Moslem interest even when 
they are aggressive and anti-national. 'I’he 
result is that they have real Moslem Ministries 
in two or three provinces devoted to strengthen 
the Moslem position even aggrcssivly in every 
detail of National life. If the Hindus elect 
only the staunchest Hindu Sanghatanists to 
the Municipalities, Boards and Councils they 
too can have seven real Hindu Ministries and 
the Hindu interest will not onlv be safe in 



( xxn ) 


fibose seven Provinces where the Hindus are in 
majority bnt they can check the Mosicni 
Ministries in the Moslem Proviiices ns well and 
force them to do justic'e to the Hindu Minori- 
ties also. If the Moslem Ministry in Bengal, 
for example, reserves (!0" n services for Moslems 
in Bengal, because there are some 55 „ Moslenss 
there, a real Hindu Sanghatanist iMinistry in 
Bombay could have adopted a retobatorv 
measure of reserving 05” o services for the 
Hindus in Bombay as there are some hO" „ 
Hindus in that Province and thus chec kfd 
the Moslem aggression in Bengal and Ihmjab 
and protected Hindu Minorities there — if mdy 
the Hindu electorates had returned t])ose 
Hindus as their representatives who were sworn 
to guard Hindu interest. 

The Hindu Mahasabha asks nothing for the 
Hindus which is not based on equality of 
treatment and is not consistent with the real 
National interest of the Indian Nation as well, 
and therefore the guarding of the Just interest 
of the Hindus is tantamount with guarding the 
National interest also. It is the present policy 
of the Congress of despising the Hindus as 



( XXlli ) 


Ooinniunal, aWiougfc they are the very bed- 
rock of the Indian Nation and putting a. 
premium on the treacherous designs of the 
Moslems, that is really anti-national. So the 
Hindu Klectorates will serve not only the just 
interest of the Hindus but the real interest cf 
tlie Nation as w'ell if they refuse to return any 
one who stands on a Congres5 ticket and is 
sworn to this present discipline of the anti- 
Hindu Hongressites, and if they vote for only 
those who stand on tlie Hindu Mahasabha 
tickets and are sworn to represent the wishes of 
tlie Hindu Community alone. 

But disregarding this wholesome advice of 
the Hindu Mahasabha the Hindu Electorates 
persisted in returning the Congress candidates 
to the (k)uncils and are consec[uently finding 
themselves humiliated and betrayed as 
Hindus even in those provinces where they 
are in majority and in which seven provinces 
they could liave wielded real political power by 
forming seven Hindu Sangbatanist Ministries. 
But if the Hindu Electorates disregard this 
Hindu Mahasabha mandate and commit tlie 
suicidal mistake they committed in the last 



( XXIY ) 

Elertions' — whose fault is it ? Surely^ that 
cannot be laid at the door of the Bindu 
Mahasabha ! 

Taking then all these adverse conditions 
and the short span of about a dozen years of 
its regular existf>nce into consideration the 
work thab the Hindu Maha Sabha has done 
or the position it has come to oecupy in the 
National aflfair is doubtless encouraging and 
creditable. Let us not forget that the Cong- 
ress itself was not a whit better organized or 
more influential in its first twenty years of life. 
The Congress did not grow over- night. Fifty 
years and three generations of Hindus have 
made it what it is. Let those Hindus who feel 
that the Hindu Mahasabha should liave been 
stronger in an alienated attitude should first 
ask themselves what have they done to increase 
its strength. Does their duty as Hindus consist 
only in sitting on the fence and watching 
unconcerned the struggle tliat tlie Hindu 
Mahasabha and the Hindu Sanghatanists are 
engaged in in defence of the Hindu cause? 
Should they not rather rush themselves in the 
lists to succour them^ fight shoulder to shoulder 



( XXV ) 


with the Hindu Sanghatanists already in the 
field against the non-Hindu aggression 
whether it be Moslem or British and accom- 
plish what is left wanting, to strive more, to 
sacrifice more than what ^^thers have already 
done? They who do nothing have surely no 
right whatsoever only to cavil at those who 
have striven to do what they could for haA'ing 
done so little. If but the Hindus realise this 
their own duty, ‘realise that after all the Hindu 
Mahasabha has been the only out-spoken, faith- 
ful and devoted advocate of the National 
interest of the Hindus, fighting against any- 
thing that threatens the hononi*, culture nr the 
political rights of Hindudoni and if but at least 
a crore of Hindus rally round its flag in a 
true Hindu spirit they can ^vifchin the inext 
twenty years’ time render the Hindu Mahasabha 
the strongest and the most predominant force 
in Hindusthan, shaping the destiny of Indian 
Nation itself in such wise as to mould the 
Hindus into a free and triumphant people in 
the world, masters in their own land — land of 
the Hindus, tyrannising over none and allowing 
none to dare to tyrannise over them. To the 



( XXTI ) 


Hindus at any rate that will be real "Swarajya’ : 
and that is the National goal the Hindu Maha- 
sabha aims at. It may succeed, it may fail : 
but well has the poet said 

Not failure, but 
Low aim is crime 

— V. D. Savakkab 





FOREWORD 


The Beginning of the Hindu Sabha Movement 

"In 1905 aft<^r the partition of Bengal began 
a new era whth the Swadeshi movement. Next 
year, however, in Dacca, the foundation of the 
Muslim Ijoague was laid under the patronage 
of the Nawah of Dacca, d’he foundation of 
the Muslim League was sooji followed by 
the forcible abduction of tlie Hindu widows 
and other inhuman acts perpetrated by the 
Mohammedan "goondas” in tJie East Bengal. 
This gave impetus to the Bengal Hindu youths 
who established Anushilan Saraitis for the 
purpose of self-defence in various towns of the 
East Bengal. In 1907 a united Bengal Confer- 
ence was held. In this political Conference we 
find two resolutions which unmistakably point 
to the revival of Hindu self-consciousness. It 
was resolved "that this Conference views wdth 
apprehension the decrease in the normal 



( w ) 


growth of the Bengal Hindu population and 
hereby appoints a committee to ascertain 
the causes which have led to this state of 
things and to suggest what steps should be 
taken to prevent it,” 'J’he second resolution 
was passed urging the people to take practical 
steps for the amelioration of the depressed 
classes. Both these resolutions showed an 
inward awakening of the Hindu mind to the 
great need of self-preservation. 

It was, however, in the Punjab where the 
religious revival on account of the propaganda 
carried on by the Arya Samaj had created a 
new life among the’ Hindus that in January 
1907 foundations were laid of the Punjab 
Hindu Sabha with aims and objects wdiic.h 
were aU explained in the following sentence 
Jhe Sabha is not a sectarian nor a denomina- 
tional but an all-embracing movement, and 
while meaning no offence to any other move- 
ment whether Hindu on non-Hindu, it aims to 
be ard<»nt and watchful in safeguarding the 
interests of the entire Hindu Community in 
all respects.” Soon followed the period of 
Minfeo Morley Reforms in the country and uo 



( ra ) 


fini, the Punjab Hindu Sabha addressing a 
long memorial to His ExceJlenoy Lord Minto 
in June 1 909, in which the grievances of the 
Hindu Community of the Punjab were repre- 
sented under three different heads. ( i ) The 
differential treatment in tlie distribution of 
government patronage; ( ii ) The disabilities 
imposed upon the Hindus by the Punjab 
Alienation of Land Act and the Punjab Pre- 
emption Act; and (iii) the disadvantageous 
position in wliich the Hindus would be placed 
in the matter of representation under the pro- 
posed Reform Scheme. With regard to the 
second grievance it was said that the practical 
working of the Act has been extremely detri- 
mental to the Hindus in as much as, while 
almost all the Mohammedan castes have been 
notified as agricultural tribes, the high class 
Hindus have been scrupulously kept opt even 
where they have held land and followed agri- 
culture as a profession for several generations. 
With regard to the-; Reform-Scheme it was 
pointed out that ''the principle which had been 
accepted rin providing for. the separate and 
special representotion of one particnlar ccon- 



( IV ) 


munity, puts educational qualifications at a 
discount and introduces a new factor of political 
importance which by giving rise to invidious 
and unjustifiable distinctions, based purely on 
de nominational considerations, will-tend tn 
accentuate social feeling and largely militate 
against the good results that the people of 
Hindusthan expected from the noble Scheme 
of Reform initiated by your Excellency.” 
Further on "Nor has any case been made out 
for any special concession to the Mohammedan 
community on the score of their alleged 
historical or political importance, that the 
government of the country, in almost every 
case, was acquired by the British from the 
Hindus; that the vast majority of the 
Mohammedans in the country are descendants 
of Hindu converts; that the Hindusthane« 
Mohammedans have never been rulers of the 
country and that even at the present time 
a great majority of the Native States of 
Hindusthan are ruled by Hindu Chiefs and 
Princes, are facts, Your Excellency’s memo- 
rialista respectfully submit/ cannot be con* 
troveisted.” 



( V ) 

The First Hindu Conferentt At Lahore. 

It seems whenever there were introduced 
Reforms in the constitution of the country, 
the Hindus were generally placed under certain 
disadvantages against which they had to 
protest. In October 1909 was held the first 
Punjab Hindu Conference at Lahore, in which 
all the important Hindus of tlie Punjab took 
part; prominent among them were L. Lajpat 
Rai, L. Hans Raj, Sjt. Bhagat Ishwar Das, 
L. Ram Saran Das, Pt. Din Dayal, L. Hari 
Chand, L. Shadi Lai, Pt. Ram Bha j Dutta, 
Pt. Thaker Datt Vaid and L Ganga Ram of 
Sialkot. The resolutions that were passed in 
this conference are expressive of the spirit of 
the resolutions that have been and are still 
being passed in almost all the Hindu Con- 
ferences that were or are still held. The 
President of the first Hindu Conference was 
Sir Protul Chandra Chatter ji, retired Judge 
of the Punjab High Court. R. B. Lala Lai 
Chand was the Chairman of the Reception 
Committee and L. Shadi Lai its General 
Secretary. 

L. Lai Chand’s whole life had been a life of 



( VI ) 


work and ?acrifice for the cause of Ary a Samaj 
and the 9indu community. His crowning work 
was to lay the foundation of the Hindu Move- 
ment. Soon after this he passed a*vay. Tn the 
words of Sjt. Shadi Lai "l)is wns a strong and 
independent personality whose force was felt 
by all who came into contact with him. Stead- 
fastness of purpose sincere devotion to a cause 
and above all, patient labour, are the abiding 
examples of his personality and are fully 
illustrated by the work which he did in connec- 
tion with the Hindu Sabha of which he was 
the founder and the mainstay. I.-. Lai Chand’s 
Address as chairman of the Reception 
Committee is a very learned document and 
illustrates bow thoroughly he had diagnosed 
the disease of the country and proposed his 
remedies for it. I would give here some ex- 
tracts from his address just to show how 
correctly he had gauged the position of the 
Hindus 23 years ago and how true his views 
are. to day as they were then. Referring to the 
goa.ditions in tiindusthan be says, ‘‘The times 
we live in are characteristically of communal 
sfenagglei, aad survival of the fittest.is.tbe all- 



( ) 


pf'^'loTimant and universal In w, wliicb rules the 
issue certainly in animate life if not even in 
inanimate nature.” This is the true order of 
destiny sni our ancient law-giver Manu 
declared it at a time now measured backwards’ 
by tens of centuries. Whatever exists in the 
world, all th^t Prajapati has ordained to be 
the food of living beings. All, both movable 
and itnmovable are the food of creatures. The 
immovable are the food of the movable, the 
toothle'^s are-the food of the toothed creatures, 
the handless that of the hand-possessed ones, 
an 1 the timid that of the brave.” ( Chap. V.- 
28-29). This law has moulded the destiny of 
tribes and of nations as of individual compo- 
sing tribes and nations from the earliest 
creation of animate life and measured their 
space of existence with an unerring scale. A 
community which does not know itself, does 
not feel its individual pulse, does not pride in 
its past and believe in its future, is, to all in- 
tents and purposes, a dead and self-effaced 

community In order to exist 

at all and exist in the midst of a struggle 
Where the- univei’sal law is encroachment and 



( vra ) 


survival of the fittest, the very first and most 
preliminary need is to realise individual exis- 
tence. This is as essential as oxygen is for 
human life. In fact it is the very breath of 
communal life, and I am glad this conscious- 
ness which at one time seemed to be receding 
into oblivion, is asserting itself in the Hindu 
Community. Need I say that the movement 
has taken its rise at the most opportune junc- 
ture. The process of dis-integratiou, if there 
was inteerration nt any time, which T doubt 
verv much, is in full swing.” Further the 
Hindus are willing to work as comrades on 
grounds of just eqtiality ; if however, there be 
neither such desire nor willingness then the 
Hindu community need not fall on its knees to 
crave for union. It has enough of u'ork for 
itself, enough of energy to work out its destiny 
for itself. The Hindu movement, we have met 
to inaugurate, is founded on deeper forces than 
imitation can reach. It is keener evolution of 
self-conciousness forced doubtless by surround- 
ing circumstances, but still as natural as an 
upheaval is moved by collateral, pressure.” 

Beferring to the decrease in the number of 



( K ) 


Hindus he said, "decrease in number signifies 
a decay in the vitality of the community and 
numerical strength forms, as it were, the pulse, 
for adjudging its warmth and vital resources. 
Whether the depletion be by transfer to other 
communities, or by ratio of death preponderat- 
ing over that of birth, the result is the same so 
far as the losing community is concerned. In 
one case it is moral death and in the other it is 
physical. The former process is as dangerous 
to the interests of the community as the latter, 
in fact more dangerous and baneful. It means 
a weakening and loosening of the tie which 
bind together a community as such. And any 
such loosening may lead to an abrupt and 
sudden disaster and dissolution. This has 
historically happened not unoften. Look at 
the noodern Persians. They are the descen- 
dants of the same ancestors as the Parsis living 
there or here. But is there any community 
of feeling between the two ? I am not sure 
how far the very presence of Parsis is tolerated 
in the country of their origin. To cite an in- 
stance nearer home there is a very large number of 
descendants of Hindu ancestors who have now 



( ^ ) 


transferred their allegiance to foreign faiths. 
They live in the country and breathe tJie same 
air as their Hindu forefathers did, and drink 
the same water, yet are not tired of proclaim- 
ing their separate and unmixable exi.stiujce 
and claiming separate privileges, as if nothing 
had ever existed as a common bond between 
the two communities.’’ 

Referring to Hindu culture he has cited 
the case of a Hindu Advocate General of 
Madras who was reported to have remarked 
in a lecture that if he were given a selection 
between the empire of the world on one side 
and Hindu epics of Ramayana andMah.abljarat 
on the other, he would reject the fcrmer and 
accept the latter. To this he adds, '"whatever 
sentiments and considerations may have caused 
Hindu Society to drift away from its true and 
ancient moorings, the beacon lighted by the 
Punjab Hindu Sabha ought in time to bring 
them back to the right channel and to help and 
strengthen to consolidate and invigorate the 
Hindu community.” “In inter-communal and 
inter-national struggle all tliat is required, all 
that is needed is to use the one generic term 



( ^ ) 

Hindu in order to safeguard Hindu interests. 
The differeiic-es preached and fought upon 
from day to day and hour to hour seem to me 

at least wholly nn-intelligihle I will take 

permission to demonstrate by relating one 
personal incident. I belong to Bhandari 
section of the Khatri community. Some 
months ago I received a communication from 
some members of my caste at Lahore that they 
wanted to form a union of Bhandaris to look 
after and to'consolidate their interests. Very 
naturally the question I put to myself was^ 
what interests has the Bhaddari section to 
protect and safeguard as distinguished from 
other Khatri castes ? The designation itself 
came into existence by bare chance, otherwise 
there was nothing else to discriminate a 
Bhandari Khatri from an Uppal, Puri or 
Mehta. I therefore very naturally declined 
the honour of member-ship.” He finished by 
telling,” '"Self -consciousness, fitness, and 
consolidation are the three crucial factors 
which mould the destiny of communities and 
ought to form the watchword of any commu- 
nity tliat at all desires to exist and live. I am 



( xn ) 


glad fchat such consciousness has arisen in the 
Hindu community. Consolidation and union 
under Hindu banner must be our first and 
foremost weapon. 

Sir Protul Chandra’s address is another long 
and learned discourse in which the Hindus 
are instructed on theauthority of their Shastras 
to give equal treatment to the depressed 
classes and to protect their widows and 
orphans, and to try to stop them from being 
converted to other religions. He has, besides, 
tried to answer the critics by saying that Hindu 
Sabha instead of throwing any obstacles in the 
way of national advancement would help the 
growth of the sentiment of nationality in the 
country. At the same time referring to the 
Mohammedan political association, which had 
recently come into existence but was given 
great prominence by the Anglo-Indian Press, 
he said that the Mohammedan claim for 
superiority and separate electorates would be 
attended with great risks. What final shape it 
will take was not yet known. Its effect wslb 
in the womb of futurity. But there was no 
doubt that separate electorates would give a 



( ™ ) 


deadly blow to the principle of nationality 
for which the Indian National Congress 
had stood. 

I would take the liberty of adding here 
another extract from a long speech of LaJa 
Lajpat Rai which he delivered on this occasion 
while seconding the resolution concerning 
Hindu unity and solidarity, which was pro- 
posed by Pt. Din Dayal. "Let me in conclu- 
sion say that by aiming at unity and solidariry 
amongst the Hindus we do not aim a blow at 
Indian Unity. I am firmly convinced that it 
is impossible to build an Indian nation from 
above. The structure must be built from 
below. It is rather putting the cart before 
the horse in expecting the Hindus and Moha- 
mmedans to unite and make a common cause 
before bringing about a sense of unity and 
solidarity amongst the different sections of the 
Hindu community itself. The attempt to bring 
about political union between the Hindus and 
the Mohammedans, has so far met with scant 
success, it if has not disastrously failed. The 
reason is obvious. Not because it was unholy, 
but because it was based upon false ideas and 



( ) 


in utter contempt of facts and existing? 
conditions. The revolt came first from the 
Mohammedans. They tlionajht that this pre- 
mature union was likely to injure them. 'The 
result is that with the lapse of years the Hindn- 
Mohammedans problem instead of being 
within a nearer distance of solution is as far 
from the desired consummation as it was 20 
years ago. Nay, to those who have eyes to 
see, it is getting more and more complicated 
every day.” 

"If instead of repeating the parrot-cry of 
Indian Unity the Hindus had whole-heartedly 
applied themselves to the reclaiming of their 
depressed classes and to the closing up of their 
ranks, they would Ijave successfully deprived 
the Mohammedans of the plea that these classes 
should not be classed as Hindus for political 
purposes. Thus they would have removed the 
ground from under the feet of those who have 
taken advantage of the internal disorganization 
of the Hindu community to defeat the Reform- 
Scheme as originally propounded by Lord 
Morley. I cannot too often repeat that the 
best way to bring about Hiudu-Mohammedan 



( XV ) 

unity is to strengthen the community Let 

the Hindus cfase to be Hindus but the Moham- 
medans shall always be Mohammedans for all 
times to come. Tlie negation of Hinduism on 
the part of the Hindus does not mean the nega- 
tion of Islam on the part of the followers of the 
latter. The best security^ for bringing about a 
desirable national evolution is to preserve the 
communal strength. It will then be the inte- 
rest of the Mohammedans to consent to the 
obliteration -of all religious distinctions for 
political purposes. In the existing condition 
of the country their first business is to streng- 
then themselves and bring about a sense of 
solidarity and unity in their ranks. This is 
what to me seems to be the highest patriotism 
Irom the Indian point of view.” 

Later History of the Hindu Movement. 

The Hindu Sabha thus started went on 
working many a year. During 1910, the Hindu 
Sabha celebrated Hindu festivals and made 
representations to the Census Commissioner 
with regard to the ommission of certain classes 
from being counted among the Hindus. The 



( XVI ) 


Sabha appointed a history sub-committee with 
L. Hans Raj as its secretary for compiling a 
true history of the Hindu period. In 1911 a 
Hindu Conference was held at Amritsar which 
was presided over by L. Lai Chand. In I9J2. 
again, a similar Conference was held at Delhi 
at which Sir Shadi Lai presided. The fourth Con- 
ference was held at Ferozpore and the fifth one 
at Ambala and a special session of it at Lohore 
in which R. S. Lala Murli Dhar was in the chair 
and L. Ramsaran Dass was the chairman of 
reception committee. The conference occupied 
it elf chiefly with consideration of the situa- 
tion created in the Western Punjab on account 
of lawlessness and rioting in the districts of 
-Jhang, Multan and Muza ffir garb, and a 
committee was appointed to make a tour in 
these districts for the purpose of collecting 
materials regarding the dacoities committ- 
ed on the Hindus of these districts. This 
committee consisting of Bakshi Sohan Lai, 
Fakir Chand and Mehta Bahadur Chand, 
submitted a thorough and detailed report of 
the losses suffered by the Hindus of almost 
all villages in these districts which was duly 



( XVII ) 


printed and presented to the Government as 
well as to the public. The importance of this 
work was like the work done by the Hindu 
Sabh .1 after the Kohat Tragedy. 

This was a period of the War and so the 
Punjab Hindu Sabha had to carry on its work 
slowly but steadily during the years 1916-17 
and 1918. In 1917 we find that a deputation 
of Hindu Sabha consisting of thirty -four 
leading Hindu gentlemen headed by Rajs 
Narendra Nath waited upon Mr. Montague 
the Secretary of State for Hindusthan. During 
the year 19 1 8 the Punjab Hindu Sabha did 
some relief work at the time of the prevalence 
of influenza and opened a relief-fund for the 
Hindus who were arrested in Kartarpur riots. 

For reasons which need not be discussed 
here, the Hindu Sabha movement could not 
catch the ‘fancy of the masses of the Punjab 
or of any other province. It remained a 
movement confined to a select class of the 
Hindu population, the commpn people remain- 
ing quite unaffected by it. The greatest 
service that was rendered by the Punjab 
Hindu Sabha was to keep the torch of light 



( XVIll ) 


burning during all these years. In tiie year 
1919 the whole country came under the in- 
fluence of a new political movement, as a 
result of which not only the Hindu movement 
but the old school of Congress was brushed 
aside. For the next three years we hear very 
little about the Hindu Sabha. A universal 
political awakening in the country coupled 
with the new religious enthusiasm created 
among the Mohammadans under the banner of 
the Khilafat movement, after the failure of 
the non-co-operation scheme of Mahatma 
Candhi, brought the masses of the two com- 
munities into a clash with each other. Then 
followed a period of communal fights or riots 
including dacoities and murders which awaken- 
ed the Hindus to a sense of the dangers that 
lay before them. 

This renaissance was the foundation of the 
new Hindu Sangathan Movement. Although 
this new movement has been attributed to 
leaders like Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya, 
L, Lajpat Rai and Swami Shraddhananda but 
the fact is that Hindu SangsEthan arose as a 
spontaneous product from the whole nation 



( XIX ) 

and had very little to do with any personality. 
FTindu Sabhas were started in all important 
towns of the country with a definite programme 
of Hindu solidarity consisting of Sangathan, 
Shuddhi and Achhut Uddhar. It seems that 
the Hindu masses had taken to the Hindu 
Sangathan movement as a result of a wave of 
indignation against the Mohammedan com' 
muiiity. This wave spent its force in a few 
years. Swami ShraddhananHa alone stuck 
faifclifully to the spirit of the movement and 
fed it hy his own life-blood. His martyrdom, 
which ought to have filled the people with 
fresh enthusiasm, produced an adverse influence 
on the leaders of the Hindu movement. Their 
enthusiasm soon cooled down and the Hindu 
movement again suffered a great relapse. The 
common people love a fight, and always like 
to work in a field where they can give vent to 
their indignation. The construtive programme 
of Hindu Sangthan could no longer appeal to 
their minds. 

The Congress came in with a new pro- 
gramme and set up a fresh agitation against 
the Grovernment, The new fight was carried 



( XX ) 


on in various fields. There was to be the 
boycott of English cloth as well ns of other 
goods. There was a movement of Civil Disob- 
edience in breaking the ordinary laws and 
ordinances promulgated by the Viceroy. Ther^i 
was terrorism carried on by means of secret 
societies. And in addition to them alfi there was 
constitutional agitation through the Legislative 
Assembly and the Provincial ('onncils. Also 
there were the Moderate leaders who were 
constantly bringing pressure upon the (Govern- 
ment and inducing it to accede to the demands 
of the people.” 

The Moslems for their own communal ends 
made a show of joining the Hindus for some 
time and this was misread by the Hindus to 
be the long desired consummation of Hindu 
Moslem unity. They jumped headlong into 
the ditch of self-forgetfulness so thoroughly 
that they did not and cannot realise the rui- 
nation of themselves as a Race and a Nation, 
They, without giving a serious thought to the 
pros and cons of the line of action they adhere 
to, ran blindly along the route the Congress, 
under the Gandhian lead from 1919 onwards. 



( XXI ) 

had chaJked oul". for them. d'he present 
Congress poll 03’ and programme has been to 
the Hindoos what the burning flame is for 
the moths and the unavoidable result will be 
the racial and national self-immolation of the 
Hindus, if they do not realise the danger be- 
fore it is too late. 


Let us look to the other side. Why are the 
Hindus so indifferent to the Hindu Mahasabba V 
Idiey ask what sacriflces tbe Hindu Mahasabha 
has made, fl’he answer requires a detailed ex- 
planation. 

I have always held that tlie Hindus owe 
their present position to an illusion to which 
they have clung in the past two decades. They 
have been deceived by (yongress sacrifices,, 
which have conjured up before them a spect- 
acle of heroism, into believing that the release 
from bondage which this country has gained 
in recent years was secured to them by the 
Congress, the agitation which it carried on 
against the Government and imprisonment 



( Stil ) 

and suffering which its members courted. The 
Congress for the gift which it is believed to 
have given to us has asked for nothing more 
than our loyalty to it which has included a 
blind acceptance of its strategy and the poli- 
tical alliances it has established. Subconscious* 
ly the Hindus have, perhaps, felt that the 
Congress, <-he bestower of the priceless gift of 
liberty, must have been right in pawning 
Hindu independence, culture and prosperity in 
exchange for an elusive Moslem support. In 
fact the emotion that has accompanied Con- 
gress activity in the last twenty years has 
destroyed in the Hindus, the love of their heri- 
tage. They have been too willing to offer them* 
selves as sacriffces at the altar of a (ioddess 
which has surreptitiously given back Hindu 
offerings to Moslems. 

While the Hindus under the spell of the 
Congress have been gloating over words and 
empty phrases, the Moslems have made materi* 
al gains. No one would grudge them their 
gains, had they not been made at the expen.se 
of the Hindus. I propose here to dispel, if T 
can> the illusion that the recent Constitutional 



( xxni ) 


advance in Hindusthan is a result of Congress 
activity. As a corollorly to it I shall also 
endeavour to show that this constitutional 
advance is not as valuable to the Hindus as 
they imagine. 

To begin with we see today an end of a 
movement which blinded the Hindus to their 
own interests. The revolutionary ardour of 
tlie Congress had died down with its acceptance 
of Provincial Autonomy. Much is said about 
Congress opposition to the Federation, but to 
take the Congress at its own words, it will 
accept office under the Federation if certain 
provisions in the Government of India Act 
1935 are altered. Indirect Elections to the 
House of Assembly, the undemocratic nature 
of representation of States in the Assembly and 
control of the Viceroy over Army and Foreign 
affairs arouse the greatest opposition. Safe- 
guards such as the powers of the Viceroy in 
legislative matters which are within the pur- 
view of the elected House need not be removed; 
gentle assurance that they will be sparingly 
used will do. Congress opposition to Indirect 
elections and State Representation is not based 



( XXIV ) 


on realistic grounds and it will, I dnre say, not 
be abl<^ to bold out against these provisions. 
Nor is it likely that it will make their alteration 
a consideration for offif'e acceptance. Indirect 
elections are more suited to a large country like 
Hindusthan and State representation had best 
be left to Rulers of States. Idie Parliament 
would never consent to hand over tlie control 
of Defence and Foreign affairs to the Assemb- 
ly. The British are not going to give up the 
Army by peaceful means. The army is their 
only safeguard against the huge debt which 
Hindusthan owes to Britain and for the annual 
payment of 45 crores of rupees. From that point 
of view the British army is a n army of Occupa- 
tion and until the advantages of occupation 
are frustrated by circumstances or British 
Power weakens, it is a vain hope that the Con- 
gress demand in this respect will be met. 

In any case it is doubtful if the Congress 
will insist on this part of its demands, Fn- 
revolutionary activitv seems now to have 
become the priciple of the Congress. The 
Hindus who participated in mass sacrifices at 
the behest of Congress leaders now find them- 



( XXV ) 


selves in posspssion of Constituf.iona] advance 
which could have been made without Congress 
intervention. We are almost where we were in 
1919 on the eve of Mcnti'ord Reforms and tlie 
provincial autonomy, in working which the 
Congress seems to be so proud, is a mere dust 
in the balance as compared with Independence. 
If this were all, one c^ould at w-orst deplore 
( 'Ongress activity during the past twenty years 
as wasteful; but it has done more tlian merely 
wasted men’s energies. Jt has hung the dead- 
vveight of Moslem interests round Hindu necks. 
1 am profoundly convinced that but for tlie 
policy of the ( ’ongress the Hindus today would 
have been far better off than they are. The 
unfortunate part of the situation is that the 
Hindus find no escape from the destiny to 
which the ( 'ongress has condemned them. 
I’hey still cling to the illusion that the Congress 
is the Goddess of liberty and do not consid('r 
whom this liberty has benetitted. They still 
return Congressmen to legislatures, while 
the Moslems League goes from strength to 
strength. 

Why am I urging that wo do not owe this 



( XXVI ) 


Constitutional progress, restricted as it to 
the Congress ? A brief survey of the antece- 
dents of the present situation will bear me out. 
The Declaration of August 17th 17, marks the 
beginning of the extension of self-government 
to this country. This declaration was made by 
Britain while she was in the throes of the most 
difficult war she has ever fought. Britain was 
pressed at the time for men and money. Ido 
not suggest that the declaration of August J7th 
was only a bait thrown out to Hindusthan to 
attract her help. Britain was ostensibly ligh- 
ting in defence of liberty of the weaker nations 
and against the growing menace of the blood 
and iron policy initiated by Bismarck and per- 
fected by Kaisar William. Whatever the 
motives of Grermany in the war, Britain at any 
rate was not fighting for colonies or territories. 
With the premises of liberty on which the 
British people had built up their fighting or- 
ganization and their enthusiasm for a war which 
they never sought, they could not continue to 
govern India absolutely autocratically. When 
she asked India help her Britain W'anted heir 
to make a common cause with the allies in 



( XXVII ) 


defence of whicli they must stake their 
possessions and their lives. If liberty was the 
common cause, its gifts could not be kept 
from India. 

Besides, wiien Britain sought the help of the 
Ignited States of Anierica, Piesident Wilson 
who shared the idealism of the nation over the 
destinies of wliich he presided, would not inter- 
vene in the war unless it n as meant to end that 
war and create a world from which wars may 
he lianishecr for ever. President Wilson saw 
that the rule of one nation over another and 
the legal sanction given to it so far by the Great 
Powers was the cause of antagonisms between 
nations which led to conflicts. Consequently, 
he made the principle of self-determination for 
nations the basis of his policy, d^his was also 
instrumental in relaxing British attitude to- 
wards her Hindusthanee Empire. Hencte the 
proclamation of August Ibth 1917. 

It is in the fulfilment of this procl«mation 
that the British G-overnment has been taking 
steps to extend self-government by easy stages 
to the Indian people. Soon after the close of 
the war, Mr. Montague, the then Secretary of 



( XXVlll ) 


States for Hindustliaii visited tliis ceontrv in 
order to stodj^ possibilities of increasing the 
participation of Hindusthanees in the gox ern- 
ment of the country. The Congress and tlie 
Moslem league concluded a pact at Luck-now 
in 1917 in preparation of the movement which 
was to follow. It would be idle to urge that 
the impetus to increa,sing self-government to 
Hindusthanees was given at that time by 
any agitation on the part of the Congress. The 
Congress at that time in point of fact had not 
acquired the revolutionary role that it assumed 
in later years. Inhere w'as no agitation nt the 
tinje excepting of course the propaganda of 
the Home Rule League, newly started by Lok- 
manya Tilak and Mrs. Annie Besant. 

The Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms were in- 
troduced in 1920. In December 1919 at the 
Amritsar Congress held nine months after the 
Jallianwala Tragedy and revolt in the Punjab 
Mahatma Grandhi wanted to welcome this 
scheme and to thank the British Grovernment 
for extending what was then a generous mea- 
sure of self-government to Hindu^han. I’his is 
significant because the Congress in this country 



( XXIX ') 


has been identified whith Mahatma Gandhi, It 
was Lokmanya Tilak who felt disappointed 
witli the scheme and did not conider it sufficient 
ly generous to merit the gratitude of the people 
of Hindusthan. All the same he urged that the 
Reforms should be worked. It is a welknown 
fact that Mahatma Gandhi with the help of 
Pandit Motilal Nehru insisted on the Congress 
declaring itself in favour of working these 
reforms and rejecting even the formal expre- 
ssion of dissatisfaction with them which Tilak 
and C. R. Das wanted to incorporate in the 
Congress resolution, A few months afterwards 
that is, on tlie 1st August, 1920, Lokmanya 
Tilak died. ,\fter him, Mahatma Gandhi who 
felt so grateful in the beginning of that year 
to the British Government for introducing what 
was actually, a very limited form of self-govern- 
ment in the, country, found himself at the helm 
of the C’ongress and preached to the amaze- 
ment of many his theories of non-co-operation 
and non-violence. 

It is significant to enquire into the reasons 
which brought about this change in the attitude 
of Mahatma Gandhi. The Caliphate was going 



( ) 

to bp driven out from ( ■onstantinople, by the 
Allies headed by Plngland. It was a. challenge 
to Islamic orthodoxy. Steeped in a sluggish 
and fanatical antitpiity and orthodox as the 
Moslems of this country ha,ve been, they could 
not witness with equanimity this reA^olutionary 
change. A people oppressed and ruled over 
by a foreign government decided under the 
leadership of the Ali Brothers t/' help the 
<^’aliphate. The Ali Brothers found that if 
they could elicit the support of the ( ongress, 
they could advance their cause better than if 
they only relied on the Moslem Community. 
Lokmanya I’ilak, 1 understand, after the Ainrit- 
sar Congress met Mahatma Gandhi only once 
before his death. It was in some meeting at 
Prayag ( Allahabad. ) In that meeting Khilaphat 
(Question was di^cu.ssed. I’ilak was not in favour 
of directly taking in hand tJie KiJapbat agita- 
tion, though he favoured every help to the 
agitation if started by the Moslems. Mahatma 
Gandhi however attended a conference held by 
the Moslems and thus occured the alliance bet- 
ween Mahatma Gandhi and the Ali Brothers, in 
my opin ion one of the most unfortunate episodes 



( .\XXI ) 


in re^^ent Hiatoi v of Hindu^thaii. A bargain 
was struck. 1'he Moslems •'’^ere to support 
the (Congress for Swaraj in excfiange for 
the C’ongress snpporting Moslems in their 
battle for the Caliph. Hindn-Muslim unity of 
the year 1920 on which ( ’ongressmen cast wist- 
ful glances was not a unit}- of purpose, of 
ideals or of culture; it wa« an albance as tem- 
porary and as open to treachery as alliances in 
history have been. 

The ( ’onsress and tlie Ivhilafat which even 
at that time remained separate entities joined 
hands and Mahatma Gandhi thankful as he 
had been to the British Government, became 
its avowed enemy. .An iniportant reason for 
this change in him was that when the (Com- 
mittee’s Report was out, they instead of con- 
demning General Dyer who had ordered tiring 
at .Tallianwala, had condemned his action as 
mere ‘error of judgement’. In September a 
special session of tlie (’ongress was held and a 
resolution declaring Khilafat and Swaraj as the 
ultimate goals of the Hindusthanee people was 
passed. These ideals were to be achieved by 
the twin weaipons of non-co-operation witli tlie 



( XXXII ) 


Brit’.ish Government and non-violetit resistance 
to its rule. At the Calcutta session not all the 
leaders of public opinion were in acrreement 
with Mahatma Gandhi about this extreme step 
of non-co-operation which led to all the suffer- 
ing that the Hindusthanee people later on 
endured. Desh Bandhu, C. R. Dass and L. 
Lajpat Rai were prominent among those who 
differed from Mahatma Gandhi but he was 
relying on Moslem support to win S^waraJ for- 
getting that Moslem support was given for 
Swaraj as a corollary to their main Kbilafat- 
ist purpose being achieved. Swaraj was pro- 
mised within a year. A loan of Rupees one 
crore was raised. Khuddar^ Charkha and non- 
co-operation became the corner stones of 
Congress agitation. Jails were iilled with 
young and old. 

In 1922 the Prince of Wales visited Hindns- 
than. Most of the leaders of the nationalist 
movement were in Jail. The British Govern- 
ment was anxious that reception should be 
accorded by Hindusthan to the heir to the 
throne. Through the medium of Sir Tej 
Bahadur Sapru and Pandit Madan Mohan 



( xxxin ) 


Malviya Lord Reading, who was then the 
Viceroy offered to meet as far as circumstances 
permitted the d,emands of the Congress if it 
agreed to receive the Prince of Wales with the 
enthusiasm which the future monarch of the 
British Empire deserved on his visit to the most 
valuable possession of the British people. Lord 
Reading went, it is understood, as far as to offer 
to change the dyarchical system of Grovern- 
ment in the provinces to full Provincial Auto- 
nomy. Desk Bandhu Dass practically gave 
his consent. Mahatma Gandhi was also not 
reluctant to accept the offer, but he made the 
release of the Ali Brothers from jail a condition 
of his acceptance of the proposal. The Vice- 
roy, suspecting the Ali Brothers of conspiracy 
with King Aman Ullah of Afganistan, was not 
able to accede to Mr. Gandhi’s condition. 
Mahatma Gandhi considered, it would appear, 
that the release of the Ali Brothers, was more 
important than the extention of a large mea- 
sure of self-government to this country. The 
plan was dropped and after fourteen years of 
needless suffering the Congress agreed to the 
present plan of Provincial Autonomy which it 



( XXXI V ) 


could have had for the asking in 192ii. The 
1925 plan would have been free from all the 
handicaps which have been imposed upon the 
Hindus by the Communal Award which forms 
a vital part of the new constitution. Is greater 
proof required of the unstatesmanlike handling 
of the political problems of this country by the 
Congress? and no greater betrayal of the 
Hindus can be imagined than the attitude of the 
Congress towards the Communal Award. 

The ardour with which the hectic compnign 
of Mahatma Gtandhi was pursued cooled down; 
for the people had been tired of agitation 
which brought them no results but inflicted 
on them suffering. Desh Bandhu Dass and 
Pandit Motilal Nehru gave up boycott of Coun- 
cils and founded the Swaraj Party, the object 
of which was to fight the Government not 
through direct action but "from within”. When 
the Swaraj Pary was formed, Mahatma Gandhi 
was in jail. A special session of the Congress 
was held at Delhi to consider this new move nn 
the part of Mr. C. R. Dass and Pandit Motilal, 
At this special session a resolution was passed, 
endorsing the formation of the Swaraj Party 



( XXXV ) 

and fchfi policy of entry into councils. On his 
release Mahatma Oandhi did net approve of 
this policy a.nd as a protest declared his retire* 
tnent from politics. 

I’he Swaraj Party fought ‘^‘from within” but 
it is dubious h^w far even this constitutional 
battle waged by the Congress was successful. 
The next step in tlie extention of Self-Oovern* 
nient to Hindusthan was already envisaged in 
tlie Montagu - Chelmsford Reforms. A com* 
mission was to be appointed after the Reforms 
had been in operation for ten years to consider 
the possibility of further extention of those 
Reforms. The appointment of the Simon 
( oinnussiorij therefore, was independent of 
the agitation of the Congress. 

-I he Royal (.'ommission on Hindusthan 
presided over by Sir John Simons had no 
Hindusthanee as its member, JTis was made 
an excuse for boycotting the Commission and 
when the Commission arrived in Hindusthan, 
the Congress received it with flags and slogans 
asking it to go back. 

In view of the subsequent happenings it 
is difficult to justify the boycott of the Si mon 



( XXXYI ) 

Commission. A committoe appointed t»y the 
Congress under the chairmanship of Pandit 
Motilal Nehru formulated a scheme of Self- 
Government for Hindusthan and its report 
which has now come to be knotvn aS 
the Nehru Report makes an interesting 
reading when we compare its proposals with 
the proposals made by the Simon Commi-' 
ssion. The Nehru scheme of Swaraj is in all 
vital matters very much similar to the pre- 
sent Constitution excluding of course^ cer- 
tain abnoxious provisions relating to the 
Communal Award and so forth. The Congress^ 
therefore w^hich condemns the Government of 
Tndia Act^ and at the same time works with 
enthusiasm its provincial part condemns what 
it formulated under the chairmanship of Pandit 
Motilal Nehru. Its criticism is not directed 
towards those provisions of the present Act 
which call for the loudest protest and which 
were not contained in the Nehru Report and 
those are its communal provisions. 

The report of tire Simon Commission con* 
tained proposals much more suitable for the 
Government of this country than the present 



( XlCiviJ ) 

Act IS* Simon Report condemned Mosleitl 
Communalism and paid little heed to the 
clamour of the Movslems for what they called 
‘rights^ at the expense of other communitiesi 
Besides, there is no indication of a Communal 
Award in that report. The Provincial Auto-* 
nomy which formed part of the Simon Com- 
mission’s report is more in accordance with the 
professed ideals of the Congress and of national** 
ism than the Provincial Autonomy under the 
present Act which the Congress has accepted. 
If the Congress had possessed statemanship 
and foresight it Would have accepted the Simon 
(Jommission scheme. 

Having started the movement of boycott of 
the Simon Commission Congress leaders de-* 
dared that they were not even prepared to 
read the report of the Simon Commission. 
I’he Moslems were naturally not very pleased 
with it> nevertheless they would haVe accepted 
it. The British Government^ however^ thought 
that if they could formulate a scheme which 
would meet with the wholehearted approval of 
the Moslems, they Would make permanent allies 
of them. The procediire of the Round Table 



( XXXVIII ) 


Cotiferehcp wa'^^ bherefore> adopted and the 
story is so reeent that it does not need elebo- 
rate narrative. I’he Congress, however, when 
the Round Table Conference scheme was pro- 
posed started again direct action under the 
leadership of Mahatma Gandhi. Mahatma 
Gandhi had not returned to the Congress when 
in Dec. 27, the Madras Congress passed the 
Independence Resolution and he declared it 
childish. Pt. Motilal prevailed up on him to 
attend the Calcutta Session wheie Nehru 
scheme was passed and one year's time was 
given to the Govt, to accept it. The Govt, did 
not mind to the ultimatum and so in Lahore 
Session in Dec. 1929 Independence Compaign 
was resolved and after sending thirty thousand 
men, and women to jails, Mahatma Gandhi 
agreed to a truce as a result of the Gandhi* 
Irwin conversations and went to the .Second 
Round Table Conference. The opinion is com* 
monly held that Mahatma Gandhi missed 
another great opportunity. A wise and tnct* 
ful use of this opportunity might have yielded 
better and speedier results in 1931, but he 
wanted — time to arrive at a settlement 



( XXXJX ) 


with the Moslem Delegates who carried on 
thoir talks with him during the day and with 
Sir Samual Hoare during the night. The 
resnlt was not unexpected. His visit was a 
complete failure, which was a triumph for the 
British Government and the Moslems. He 
came back to Hindusthan a disappointed man 
but still sticking to its resoh'e, was put back 
into jail. 

The present reform scheme was mostly 
prepared by the three Round Table Conferences 
which were held in London between the years 
1930 and 1933. The proposals of the British 
Govenment which emerged as a result of these 
conferences and were embodied in a White Pa- 
per with certain modifications which were made 
by the Joint Parliamentary Committee form 
the basis of the Government of India Act 1935. 
Mahatma Gandhi who was then in prison could 
find only one fao.lt with the White, Paper pro- 
posals and that was his dislike of separate 
electorates for untouchables indicating thereby 
that he did not disapprove of other communal 
and separatist provisions in that scheme. In 
his usual dramatic manner he determined to 



( xxxx ) 


fast unto death unless separate electorates for 
untouchables were abolished. I’his fast pro- 
duced the Poona Pact which labelled seven 
crores of people in this country as the depressed 
classes permanently^ tore them away from the 
Hindus. 

Circumstances which were not created by 
the agitation of the Congress have led fi'om 
time to time to extention of self-government 
to Hindusthan. Nor can it be maintained as 
has been done that though Mahatma Gandhi’s 
direction of politics in this country has not 
achieved Self-Government and yet he has been 
responsible at least for the political awakening 
of the masses of this country, d’his is a fallacy 
which needs to be exploded. The awakening 
of political consciousness among the masses 
of this country is the result of circumstances 
created largely by the Great War. It was 
again the Great War which dispelled ignorance 
about the ^white man’ in this country. It was 
again the Great War which pressed the British 
Government to call for Hindustbani help. 
This appeal could not have been but accompni- 
ed by awakening, credit is undoubtedly due to 



( XXXXI ) 


Mr. Gandhi that he utilized this consciousness 
to preach his peculiar theories. They may have 
a moral value but in politics where theories 
are judged by results they have proved to be 
useless. Whatever improvement is discernible 
in the Indian political system can hardly be 
ascribed to Mr. Gandhi’s leadership. 

The irresistible conclusion to which this 
brief survey of the past two decades in this 
country leads us is that Constitutional advance 
in the Government of India has not been a 
result of the sacrifices of the Congress. As a 
matter of fact the Congiess has always opposed 
those advances. They have been imposed 
upon us in spite of the obstruction offered by 
the Congress in worse form than they would 
have been, but for its politics. If there are 
defects and safeguards in the 'Indian Consti- 
tution’ we have to be thankful to the Congress 
for foTciag the British Government to incorpo- 
rate those safeguards and those defects in it. 
The boast of the Congress that its sufferings 
have brought self-government to this country 
is ba seless. No greater evidence is required 
than the effect of the Communal Award on the 



( xxxxn ) 


Bengali Hindus, a people who played the lead- 
ing part in the political advancement of the 
country and made the greatest sacrifices but it 
is the Award which quite apart from being 
anti-national and anti-democrtic, has deprived 
the great Hindu Community of Bengal of its 
legitimate place in the political life of the 
country and reduced them practically to politi- 
cal impotence. The Hovt. of the province 
has passed into the hands of those who did 
not raise even their little finger in the cause 
of the country. 

But it is an illusion which the Hindus have 
cherished in spite of the fact that the policy 
of the CongTPSs has spelled disaster to them. 
Without Congress intervention the ‘Indian 
Constitution’, I am profoundly convinced, 
would have been free from the evil of Commu- 
nal Award. The illusion that the Congress 
has brought freedom to this country deserves 
to be dispelled as quickly as possible if Hindus 
are to safeguard the small preserves that are 
left to them. Presiding at the Hindu Maha- 
sabha Session in Ajmer in 1933, T drew the 
attention of the Hindus to this point and ex- 



( xxxsm ) 


plained the Hindu view regarding the new 
Constitution. That illusion. I cannot make it 
too abundantly clear, the Congress exploits, to 
the increasing detriment of the Hindus. In 
1920 two courses were open to the Congress. 
One was to demand freedom as an act of 
patriotism. In that demand alliances would 
not have entered. The other was to trade in 
freedom with the Moslems. This the Congress 
did. The results are unhappily only too clear. 
If the Congress had not engineered the theory 
that liberty can only follow Hindu-Muslim unity, 
liberty to-day would not be hampered and 
conhned as it is. I am. dubbed as a communa- 
list, but I speak from the point of the freedom 
of the country. How near was our goal, when 
Hindus and Moslems irrespective of caste and 
creed, were actuated by patriotism alone? 
To-day we are seeking Hindu-Muslim unity 
and not Freedom. The Hindu-Jdtislim unity 
is impossible of achievement by pacts and 
concessions. It ( Hindu-Muslim unity ) is the 
very negation of patriotism which knows no 
Hindus or Moslems. 

The real nature of Hindu-Muslim problem 



( xxxxiy ) 


has been quite clarifeed by the recent talks 
between Mi*. Jinnah and the Congress leaders. 
Mr. Jinnah asserts that the Muslim League 
should be recognised as the sole representative 
of the Muslim community; The Congress 
leaders sa;y that by doing that they nullify 
the position of the Congress as the nationlist 
organisation. Mr. Jinnah argnes that there are 
two nations in the country and the Congress 
ever since the Lucknow Pact has been recog- 
nising Moslems as a separate community. The 
Congress is confroted with the most serious 
situation. If Mr, Jinnah is right and I believe 
he is, then the Congress theory of building up a 
common nationality falls to the ground. The 
situation has got only two solutions. One is 
the partition of the country into two and the 
other to allow a Muslim state to grow within 
the State. That is sure to take as to a period 
of trial of strength and in that case the Hindu 
Mahasabha alone and not the Congress can 
offer the right solution, 

I am convinced that if the Congress had 
not thought of Hindu-Muslim unity,- if Mr. 
Gandhi had not made his ill-fated pact, with 



( xxxxv ) 


the Ali Brothers, it could have made a signifi- 
cant contribution to the achievement of 
Freedom. It would then not have nurtured 
an enemy to its ideals within its own territories. 

To-day thanks to the Congress that the 
Hindus in some provinces bear the twin yokes 
of the British Covt. and of the Moslems. If 
there are any that deceive themselves that the 
Hindus performed an act of self-abnegation for 
the ideal of liberty, they will be dis-illusioned 
by what the future holds. Sooner or later, 
they shall have to come to the Hindu Maha 
Sabha for their safety and progress. 


— Bhai Parmanaxda 



PREFACE 


Often Hindus themselves — dt is most surpris- 
ing — ask us questions — Why should there be 
a separate All-India Organisation, the Hindu 
Mahasabha, when there is the Indian National 
Congress which looks after the politica] interests 
of all ? Why should we not still further streng- 
then the Congress organisation and seek our 
political salvation through it ? Why should 
we create divisions amongst the Hindus and 
come in the way of concentration of all Hindu 
energy and resources on the furtherance of the 
Congress cause, that is, development of National- 
ism, killing of Communalism and establishment 
of Poorna Swaraj ? Do Hindus want anything 
else specially for themselves ? 

These questions must be satisfactorily 
answered. And they must be answered in a 
manner as shall appeal to reason and stand the 
test of logic. 

The population of India though composed 
of one Hindu Race, is divided into three main 






( 11 ) 


religious communities, Hindu®, Moslems and 
Chiistians. The Moslems and the Christians 
are proselytiVing communities; in fact prosely- 
tisation is the life-breath in tl eir nostrils. They 
cannot grow and prosper without proselyti- 
sation. They therefbre exploit every power 
and opportunity they can secure for stimulat- 
ing prosely tisation. They are, therefore, a daily 
growing Community, each of them. Hindus, 
on the other hand, are not a proselytizing 
community and therefore they cannot recoup 
the loss they suffer from the encroachments 
of Moslem and Christian prosely tisations. They 
are, therefore, or have been till now at least, a 
daily declining Community. Hindus, however, 
are now fully awakened to the decaying ^effects 
of this defect in their sociology. They have 
now come to realize that Hinduism cannot 
live, grow and prosper unless it imbibes to the 
same degree of fanaticism, the exclusive Comu- 
nalism of Islam and Christian India. They are, 
therefore, grOwihg more and more zealous of 
their natural, legitimate and rightful powers 
and privileges; so that they may utilise them in 
checking the furthferrot of foreign proselytisa- 



( UI . ) 


tion and also in reclaiming whatever has been 
lost throughout the past centuries of . Moslem 
and Christian proselytisation. Who can find 
fault with the Hindus cherishing and working 
for the realization of such a legitimate 
aspiration, if proselytisation is to be regarded as 
a free birthright of a free people ? Thus there 
is the fundamental and irremovable cause for 
religious rivalry and antagonism. Unless the 
Moslems and the Christians agree honestly and 
sincerely to stop all further proselytisation or 
the Hindus meekly agree to submit without 
retaliation to such proselytisation, who can 
truthfully aspire to prevent Communalism 
arising and affecting the vested interests in 
every sphere of life ? Communalism being 
thus art inevitable part, of the daily life, cannot 
be killed. It is, therefore, not only wrong but 
actual self-deception to suppose that the 
Congress can kill Communalism. 

If this is so and — who can truthfully gainsay 
it? — then there is no minority problem in India 
as European politicians and statesmen under- 
stand it. The minority problem of Europe is 
pre-eminently a racial one; and not religious; 



( IV ) 


because there is only one religion, Christianity, 
which is common to all, both minority and majo- 
rity communities. It being so there is no room 
there for proselytisation. Neither community 
can, therefore, aspire to swallow np the other. 
The minority problem of India, on the other 
hand, is, if anything, pre-eminently religious 
and not racial at all; and as such, the fact that 
the original religions of India, comprised in the 
generic terni — Hinduism — are essentially static 
and tolerant, as opposed to the foreign religions, 
Islam and Christianity, which are, on the 
contrary, equally aggressive and proselytising, 
adds to the seriousness and the complexity of 
the problem. Here there is the constant fear 
of one religion swallowing the other by pro- 
selytisation. Say, for instance in Caechoslovakia 
Caechs cannot swallow the Sudetens; nor the 
Sudetens the Czechs. But quite contrary is the 
case in India. Here the foreign -proselytising 
religions are aspiring to swallow 411 the other 
static original religions. 

Such being the case, the problem of 
Democracy peculiarly affects the vital interests 
of the Hindus. Democracy, in its broadest 



( V ) 


aspect^ means a system of government which is 
based on the counting of heads. In India, 
Islam and Christianity being the proselytising 
religions, the Moslem heads and the Christian 
heads are yearly increasing in numbers and are 
hopefully aspiring to swallow up the ma jority 
community of the Hindus or to reduce it to a 
minority community. In Bengal, for instance, 
during the last 50 years, the Hindus have been 
reduced from 55 % to 45 '’/o and the Moslems 
on the contrary, have risen from 45®/o to 
55*’/o. Ho those Hindus, who are at present 
opposing the Mahasabha, want to remain un- 
concerned towards this, the most realistic 
aspect of the problem and really do not mind 
if, by the time the Poorna Swaraj comes, the 
Hindus are swallowed and wiped out of exis- 
tence; or actually reduced to minority and lose 
their majority position. Is this not a real 
.calamity staring us in the face? To counteract 
such a calamity, who can inspire and give 
lead to the Hindus ? Can the Congress come 
to the succour of the Hindus ? Obviously not. 
Thus there is no other organisation than the 
Hindu Mahasabha, which can legitimately 



( vr ) 

nndertiake and discharge this duty effectively. 
This is the crux of the whole problem. 

Having thus far dealt with the fundamental 
of the problem, and having appreciated the 
essential helplessness of the Congress in the 
matter, let us now, from the same point of 
view, examiTie the policy and the activities of 
the Congress, with the object of ascertaining 
if they are or likely to be conducive to the 
stability, growth and prosperity of the 
Hindus. 

The general policy of the Congress is the 
political emancipation of the country, irrespect- 
ive of considerations based on caste or creed, 
that is, it works equally for all, whether, by re- 
ligion, they be Hindus, Moslems, or Christians. 
Its conception, therefore, of Patriotism, 
Nationalism, and Democracy is essentially 
non-communal and takes no cognizance of 
differences of religion among the nationals of 
India. Besides the Congress believes that it 
cannot achieve this emancipation without 
Hindu-Moslem unity and what is more, it 
does not desire to bring about such eman- 
cipation by any other rneans than Love 



( TTI ) 


and ' 'Non-Violence. Such has been and is 
still the position of the Congress, though, 
in the practical application of this policy 
for the solution of the day-to-day problems 
and controversies that arise inevitably, the 
Congress has often deviated from the right 
path and, since the rise of the Mahatma to 
dictatorship in the Congress, during the last 
18 years, the Congress has developed a ten- 
dency that may aptly be called a pro-Moslem 
mentality at the cost of Hindu interests with 
the ultimate object of placating and winning 
them over to merge m the Congress. 

Now let us see how the Moslems have been 
re-acting. From the very commencement of 
the Congress movement, the Moslems have 
studiously kept themselves aloof and have 
latterly formed an All-India Organisation of 
their own, the Muslim League, for the very same 
objective of the political emancipation ol the 
country which the Congress has been actively 
working for; but the Moslem scheme of 
emancipation is essentially and fundamentally 
bsused on the essentially communal ambition 
of winning a domineering position for Islam in 



( vin ) 


this hoary land of the Hindus. The late Sir 
Mohammed Tqbal, the inspiring Poet-Philoso- 
pher and thought-moulder of the Moslems of 
India, has been preaching : — 

^'Patriotism is a perfectly natural virtue and 
has a place in the moral life of a man. Yet 
that which really matters is a man’s faith, his 
cultural and historical traditions. These are 
things which, in my eyes, are worth living for 
and dying for; 'and not the piece of earth with 
which the spirit of a man happens to be tempo- 
rarily associated.” 

"I am opposed to Nationalism as it is under- 
stood in Europe, not because if it is allowed to 
develop in India, it is likely to bring less mate- 
rial gain to Moslems; I am opposed to it, 
because I see in it the germs of athestic 
materialism, which I look upon as the greatest 
danger to modern humanity.” 

"Our Ideal is well defined. It is to win, 
in the coming Constitution, a position for Islam, 
which may bring her opportunities to fulfil 
her destiny in this country.” 

Thus it is quite clear that the Moslems have 
no idea of Patriotism, or Nationalism, if shorn 



( IX ) 


of Moolem commutialism; nor do i-hey care for 
Swaraj in India, if the Swaraj does not offer to 
tham a domineering status in the administra- 
tion of the country. Their one pointy on which 
they have ooncentrated, for the present, all 
their energy and intellect and staked everything 
that counts in life, is how to “win” a position 
for Islam in India, even if it be at the cost 
of others. Does this, in any sense, mean the 
need for minority-protection ? 

What is the cure to such a mentality ? It 
has now reached its oulminating^point; it is no 
mere bluff. It has now begun to demand 
division of India into Moslem India and Hindu 
India. They now want two separate Federa- 
tions, the Hindu Federation and the Moslem 
Federation. They further demand that the 
Moslem Federation should have “the right to 
admit any other Moslem state beyond the 
Indian frontiers, wishing to join it.” 

One of the leading lights of the Muslim 
League, Haji Sir Abdulla Haroon, M. L. A. 
( Central ), declares from hou8e4ops that 
“Democracy is not suited to Indian soil, tradi- 
tions and environments” and while repeating 



( X ) 


the demand for two separate Federations, he 
expresses himself with a. determination, which, 
he asserts, if averted, will lead to Civil War. 

Such a mentality cuts at the very root of 
the aims and objects of the (Congress and of all 
its policies, principles, faiths, philosophy and 
programme, as were being moulded and deve- 
loped by no less a personage than Mahatma 
Gandhi, from the time he entered the Congress 
since 1920. In the face of such a stubbornly 
Communal mentality of the Moslems, what 
hope can the Congress hold out ? 

What is the remedy ? Can the soul force 
of Mahatma Gandhi hypnotise the Muslim 
League to climb down and give up its trucu- 
lence? The Congress slogans of “No Swaraj 
without Hindu-Moslem unity", or “Love and 
Non-Violence", or “Offers of Blank Cheques," 
are no remedies. They only generate defeatist 
mentality in the Hindus and further strengthen 
the separatist and bargaining mentality of the 
Moslems. , To be frank and boldly truthful, the 
remedy lies in the robust Nationalism of the 
Hindu Mahasabha. It is inspired neither by 
any sordid and poisonous desire to gain iUegi- 



( xr ) 


fetmafce advantages at the ccMst of other commu- 
nities; nor tinged with the fear of any 
community; nor handicapped with the feeling 
of helplessness and defeatism, because this or 
that conjmunity is not prepared to co-operate 
and pull its weight in companionship. The 
Hindu Mahasabha, ip its pure and unalloyed 
Nationalism and in absolute fearlessness arising 
out of its quite transparent purity of heart, 
seeks the friendship of all without, however, 
helplessly depending on it and scrupulously 
refrains from offending any body gratuitously. 
It, however, is prepared to fight even 
against odds, or any unholy combinations as 
occasion may arise — which Hod forbid — for 
the political emancipation of the country on 
quite non-communal lines. 

Can the Congress say so ? No, it cannot 
fight without the previous assurance of help 
from the Moslems. The Hindu Mahasabha is 
the only organisation which can be a sm-e guide 
to the Hindus and the people generally. 

Like the Congress, the Hindu Mahasabha 
also is anxiously seeking for Hindo-Mbslem 
unify; but it does not believe tJaafe Swaaraj is 



( XII ) 


impossible of achievemeTifc without Moslem 
co-operation, though its hand is ever stretched 
for such co-operation on honest and honourable 
principles. Unlike the Congress, however, it 
hates bargaining. As for the Hindu-Moslem 
Unity Mr. dinnah says to the Moslems; — 

^‘Organise yourself and unite. I make no 
secret of it that we have got a lot of rubbish in 
our midst. We must improve, rise up, and 
weed that out. If we go through that process 
and bring out better Mo.slems, the finrst steel 
of the Moslems; and if the Hindus do the same 
and equally bring out their finest steel, then 
there will be real unity and on that day, the 
freedom of India is won.” 

What else has the Mahasabha been preach- 
iiig? This is a paraphrase of the age-long 
Sanatana dictum of the Hindus, in which the 
Hindu Mahasabha has'nn.shakable faith. Who 
can say with justice to the contrary ? And Mr. 
dinnah is no ordinary Moslem. He. is, par- 
excellence, the one man amongst the Moslems, 
who can deliver goods from his side. If the 
real Hindu Moslem Unity cannot be attained 
in any other way, as Mr. Jinnah rightly says, 



( XIII ) 


then it must be admitted that, as the Maha- 
sabha lias always been asserting, the ways of 
the Mahatma and the Congress are not the 
ways to bring about what Mr. .Jinnah calls real 
Hindu-Moslem Unity, capable of winning free- 
dom for India. And if the Mahatma be right 
that there can be no Swara j without Hindu- 
Moslem Unity, then the ways of the Mahatma 
and the Congress are not the ways that will lead 
to Swaraj, much less to Poorna Swaraj. The 
Swaraj can only be attained if the Hindus, as 
Mr. Jinnah observes, organise and unite and 
bend all their energies and concentrate all 
their resources en the one objective of bringing 
out the finest steel of the Hindus. In this en- 
terprise and for this purpose, the Hindu Maha- 
sabhaand the Muslim Lea gue of Mr. Jinnah are 
collateral opponents, preparing eventually for 
real heart-to-heart Hindu-Moslem unity, 
having received co education in the same 
school of stern and implacable realities and 
under the same Grand Master, the practical 
World, and the History of India of the last one 
thousand years. 

It such is the real mentality of the Moslems 



{ XTV ) 

and if Mahatma, (randhi's philosophy of comp- 
lefce renunciation and surrender, practised with 
almost relirjious faith and fervour during the 
last IH years, could make no change in their 
mentality, then the question is — How are 
Nationalism, Hindn>Moslera Unity and Swaraj 
to be established ? What is the conception of 
the Hindu Mahasabha in respect of these, and 
what remedy does it prescribe V 

The Hindu Mahasabha advises the Hindus 
to shed their mentaliW of defeatism brought 
about by the Mahatma’s teacliings of ‘No 
Swaraj without Hindu-Moslem Unit}’;’ and 
remembering the doings of their fore-fathers 
immediately before the British came, to take 
courage in both hands and assert the right of 
the. Majority Community. In any country, it 
is always the right of the Majority Community 
to establish Swaraj and to create its own 
Nationalism, to maintain internal Law and 
Order and to defend the Swaraj from external 
aggression. Say, in Afghanisthan, Who have 
established Afghan Swaraj? "Who maintain 
internal Law and Order ? Who defends the 
Afghan country from foreign invasions ? It is 



( XV ) 


the special responsibility of the Afghans, the 
majority community of Afghanisthan, as it is 
also their noble and happy privilege. The 
Hindus and the Sikhs, who form the mino- 
rities in Afganisthan, help and co-operate 
with them, but if they were not to do so, does 
it mean that the Afghans should throw up the 
sponge and approach the British Prime 
Minister for a Communal Award ? If we only 
make up our mind and walk in the footsteps of 
Afghanisthan and of the Hermans, there will be 
no foundation left for onr defeatist mentality 
and helplessness. A wide vista of live virility 
and hope, hither-to unexperienced, will be 
immediatly opened out to us and we will fee] 
the glow and energy of real rejuvenated man- 
hood. 1’he world will then recognise us as 
men and respect us as such and also feel awe 
about us. Our so-called minorities will then 
give up their shrewd friendship with the 
shrewder Britishers and begin to claim kinslnp 
with us as they really are our kins in blood 
and bones. 

Such is the Nationalism that is conceived 
and practised in everyday life in both Western 



( XVI ) 

and Eastern countries. If it is so, then ^hy 
should Nationalism be interpreted differently 
in India ? Can the Congress of Mahatma 
Gandhi conceive of such Commnnalism ? It 
is Hindu Mahasabha alone which can have the 
boldness to undertake this sacred duty. 

Here it will not be inappropriate to say 
something about Communism and Bolshevism 
of the Russian brand wliicli is rising in India 
and, which js more and more gaining ground 
within the Congress. So far the differences bet- 
ween the Congress and tlie Hindu Mahasabha 
were merely differences in mentalities induced 
in their respective leaders by differences of their 
past historical traditions and of their policies 
and programmes; and hope was not wanting 
at least in some of the leaders of thought in 
the Hindu Mahasabha that a day is sure to 
dawn, sooner or later, when by the experience 
of the every-day realities of the inter-communal 
situation in the country, the Congress may 
grow wiser and, by making mutual adjust- 
ments, the Congress and the Hindu Mahasabha 
may come nearer and join hands in co-opera- 
tion and companionship for the realisation of 



( XVTT ) 


tihe common aim of Poorna Swaraj. But 
recPinfcly events have happened and are happen* 
ing, in connection with the growth of C'om* 
munism in India, w'hich, if sponsored by the 
Congress officially, will undoubtedly create 
fundamental and unadjustable differences and 
alienation of minds between the Congress and 
the Hindu Mahasabha, Avhich may Gfod forbid. 

In view of f-.he fact that demolition of Reli- 
gion forms the very foundation of the Ilussian 
Communism, it is no wonder that the Hindu 
Mahasabha regards Communism, as the Arch- 
bishop of Edinburgh has rightly characterised 
it, as “^the greatest danger, socially and morally, 
that faces the world to-day.” The Archbishop 
further says : — 

“Its progress has left a hideous trail of 
violence, bloodshed, and sacrilege where-ever 
it succeeds in usurping power. Its domination 
is maintained by a system of tyranny, which 
for its injustice and ruthless, is unsurpassed in 
History. Truly might it be said that never ih 
History has such a black tide of evil poured 
over the world as that which is now pouring 
from Moscow.” 



( xviri ) 


Another authority. Cardinal (ioma Thomas, 
Arcli bishop of Toledo, blaming Russia for the 
Civil War in Spain, says ; — 

“1'he Tartar soul, the genius of Communist 
Internationalism, destroyed the Christian senti- 
ments of a large part of the people and made 
them light them against Spain.” 

Such is Communism for which some of the 
most prominent leaders of the Congress stand. 
But what is tjhe position of the Hindu Maha- 
sabha in this respect ? 

Whether Islam and Christ in India will 
agree cheerfully to their own demolition, so 
that the Communism of the Congress leaders 
may prevail and prosper, bringing in the so- 
called millennium of honey and milk for all, 
proving the truth of the prophecy of these 
leaders that “unless Socialism gathered strength, 
poverty, unemployment, and starvation were 
not removable'’, it is for them to say. But 
let none doubt that it will be impossible for 
the Hindu Mahasabha to reconcile itself to the 
principle of demolition of Religion. The 
Hindu Mahasabha, therefore, hopes and prays 
that the Congress may not continue to connive 



( XIX ) 


at and allow itself to swept off the feet by 
the rising tide of Communism. 

If the Congress has wisdom and will follow 
a skilful strategy the Hindu Mahasabha will 
always prove a handy organisation to act as a 
buffer between the Congress and the Muslim 
League on one side and an effective weapon 
with which to strike at and sul)due the demon 
of Communism on the other. 

Now’ if I were to summarise tlie above ana- 
l\sis of the situation, it will not be far from 
truth if I were to say ; — 

1. That the entire scheme of the Mahatma 
of Swaraj in six months based on Hindu- 
Moslem Unity and removable of untouchability 
has hopelessly miscarried not only in respect 
of the time-period wdthin which Swaraj was to 
be attained; but, what is of vital importance, 
in respect of the Hindu-Moslem Unity also, 

2. That the dream of Mahatma (xandhi 
of Hindu-Moslem Unity, through complete 
communal self-abnegation of the Hindus, as 
vouchsafed by the offers of Blank Cheques and 
the policy and practice of “organised Love and 
Non-Violence even unto death,” with people 



( XX ) 


being prepared to die “to a man without shed- 
ding the blood of the robber’’^ and also to 
lose all including, '^the liberty and possessions 
of their families”, has so far proved not only 
a volatile dream but, I would say, a direct ins- 
tigator of the Moslem proposal of a separate 
Federation of their own, thus dividing India 
into Hindu India and Moslem India. 

3. That the philosophy of Love and Non- 
Violence has been thoroughly discredited as a 
practical means for maintaining internal Law 
and Order and securing immunity from foreign 
invasions; as well-as for bringing about Hindu- 
Moslem Unity. 

Even the Congress Min stries, working 
under the very nose of Mahatma Gandhi, have 
frequently to requisition the services of the 
British Military and the Police, for maintain- 
ing internal peace. 

As for the Hindu-Moslem Unity, it is ins- 
tructive to note what Mr. Jinnah says. He 
says that “the Congress wants to dominate 
over the Moslems and to impose on us Hindu 
Raj, culture and philosophy. I have made it 
clear that as long as there is life in me. I will 



( XXI ) 


never allow the Congress to do this. As 
long as the Congress does not come to 
us as equals^ there nan be no peace in the 
land. It is a matter of life and death for the 
Moslems.” 

4. That as regards Non-Co-operation as 
opposed to Responsive Co-operation, it has 
been found by actual experience, though the 
Congress may not admit it in so many words, 
that Responsive Co-operation, which in itself 
implies preparedness for fight by Non-Violence 
and Violence as the occasion and circum- 
stances may demand, pays more than Non- 
Co-operation. 

5. That, as for Nationalism and Evolution 
of India into a united Nation, the Moslems by 
their arrogant and suicidal proposal of two 
separate Federations, have given the ambition 
a blow from which the Congress working on 
the philosophy of Mahatma Gandhi will nob be 
able to rescue it. Who else can do it other 
than the Hindu Mahasabha ? 

Thus it would be seen that the whole edifice 
of un-natural idealism of Poorna Swaraj 
through Love and Non-Violence and Hindu- 



( XXII ) 


Moslem lenity built so laboriously and at such 
tremendous sacrifice of the Hindu interests 
has now crashed to tatters and the whole show 
has ended in a most humiliating fiasco. What 
of Swaraj in six months, there is no likelihood 
of Swaraj at all. No Nationalism, no united 
Nation. No Love, no Non-Violence. On the 
contrary, Moslems defiantly demand separate 
Federation and threaten Civil War. Hindus, 
with Mahatma (Jandhi on their brains are 
looking at them vacantly and in awe, unable to 
understand and trust their own self; because 
they cannot, on the spur of the moment, shed 
their studiously cultivated faith of ^No Swaraj 
without Hindu-Moslem Imity.’ In the midst 
of utter ruin of their own self-confidence. 
Hind as feel that they are helplessly and hope- 
lessly stranded in the midst of dense woods of 
prejudices and superstitions, hypocrisies and 
bluffs, complete loss of self-confidence and 
hopeless dependence on others, having been 
entangled in the cobwebs of Truth, Love and 
Non-Violence, d’hus all sacrifices and suffer- 
ings of the Hindus have been wasted, so far as 
the results expected to be achieved from the 



( XXIII ) 

political philosophy of Mahatma Gandhi are 
concerned. 

Who can emancipate the Hindus and give 
them right guidance ? Who can re-habilitate 
self-confidence in them and again make men 
of them, children and grand-children of their 
wn fore-fathers, who, in their own Imperial- 
sm, had reared up and were running their 
Swaraj, fighting against three enemies on three 
fronts at one and the same time, that is, the 
East India Company in the East and South; 
the Portuguese on the West; and the Moghuls 
on the North ? They were not the victims of 
such unmanly fears that if this or that Com- 
munity will not co-operate with them, they 
will not be able to build up Swaraj. 

There is only one Organisation and that is 
the Hindu Mahasabha, which alone can bring 
about this change of heart in the Hindus. If 
Hindus desire to survive and to regain the 
position of Masters in their own home, which 
rightfully belongs to them, they have no poli- 
tics other than that of the Hindu Mahasabha. 


— B, S. Moosje. 



^ 5^: srr^iT ^ 

^I'<T «fJ^:T5lT 1 1 

«TTJC?r ^ ^ «¥?T!rT 5?r5ft RI^JT 1:% 

Rf 5 Rrr^RR t 

?«■% «n«RT^« «rTR ’J55 

^ R^s I fip piRT ^ 

?Tr?lw ^ f«5T ?T «^I^5R fif 

«ft ^ t I 5^ ?IT R?;RR?5fMlfH *T ?IR 

5^t ^ 5C^, ?IT ^€f 

^r*r^( I RT^’ ?r^ rc Rff i t sftRiRT ^ 
f§? ^ STT^ 

STT f^»JCRI€r ^T »im RRT^ t # >ft R« ^ RR^R^ 
mnf^ «p! % rhrr rt f«?§; RrfRRR 



^ arnt ^ ^it, 

snw^nsft «rrf^ |, >3^% ^ 

m 5^»r ^ ?«IH 5?Cf I ^ <155 ^*r % ift 
arr«iR i?: it • ’'Ttw ^ ^ 

’ST^rTRt ?r»T?^ ^C ^ <3?<T9! f»?n 

% »TTj]Rr-4t ^rCf it 1 5fT'»l?r «jt?i ^ wirr 
arf^ itf^, ta?nj ^ »ft *rnwt^. 

fS ar?ft^ ^^rr i^^t crw- 

^ ^ «ct5r f^?Ti i) m Hlf ^ Jtif 

srrerr l %f 1; f« f €r erir^r «Bt wtif 

5j?r?T5T €t nf 1 1 f?T wJT^r ^ sr«r?: ^ 

'TCTwhi, itJi, it^T 1% t • «t^nfW[T 
sr^K % f *rr5rO m a«rr ar*^ ^fi:d ^15 

^ ^ t, fit itirt srtpn % % w’w: 

fit^ ^titirr ^rnfsgr ^<% tj| si^n: % fRitr 
^ w I: I 

“fS[ ^errtfft w ctretT snaRaiw, 'rfett 

trrarittr aft, ?tntft si^r^, irif ’snf^ ft f# 
ft ?r«w %t WPTitr ^ «ft I ft 

«m % WRj ft ^fftw ftitft ^ an^ wr 
^^*IOT l«rT t ?rf sRT^ 1 1 ^luf^ «IR»» ft ^TRifare 



?r«rr ^ ^ 

^ ^ ^ «T^ ^?r% 5rm 

^»T 11% t ?f*n n«rT I: I *rfi5»ii 

nrsft ^it % «R?5 %5n ^ ^ ^ |«n | 

"3^% -^i^^snc % spw ^fl % i 

??f^ ^ f% >ft 5r«n ^«in3r % ^fff%- 

«RT ?r*nw %%t ^i5r{?i?p % ^i%« % ^ftcic 

^ 'sn^ % iftc f 8[ ^T5r^f%« ^ 

WKH % St^ rtsn ^J^?W % 51% «15J^ w;%l% % «Rai 
^Tvs^ % %T% % wr«rT ^if ^ % I ^wrrft 

«r^i^ ^ «ftt 5n«rsft stht^^ %3t f»n% 

% TO »i% 1 1 f^^«n % ’«KOT %if«ra 

*if iT% 1 1 5R5 i?ht ?PT '3q%:fi % «EW?g[ 

>iwit «5t 51^ % ;c«a% |q 5?TT?T ^?: 5rqpn % %T% it 
^T % I TO^T WR «n%T« 551% % %% 0 

^TOT ^ t’WfR: «T % I «1KI ^8[ ^ 

%5T^ «R%3I %^5r %?I % RIT m 

tT^5ft% % %% ^ it 1 1 1 % %«t ^«r % 

% m*r «r'«iR ^ ^ tor: ^ gr% | i 

%^%«%% %'|: ^r»T5H %^R % %lf%5mT TO# 
RTTO%V 1 1 %# # TO% ^ 551% 551% Hg^S^t % 
5RR TO it %^C ^5# % I ^ Wt*l It f% %yf5rw 



[«] 

«ri wife % ^ f^?RI SR??! f«?IT ?IT 

^ I ^ ^'t Ct, ^ sn*^?! ?Tt!:«T ^ snn 

=^1^ t, ^ f^?: ^ «rT?ft ?r«rr > 351 % 

^5^ I ^ ^ 

?!«!T ^?!% ^^ |«? ^ «r#« ^«n ?T5l%f^f! si^ 
€t % m«r ^i?TT I «rT?!t 5r?!?T^i ^ 

?:^T g*!T gsr^ % ^ 

sr??^^ f|?l«PT s?if^Ti5r ?r«n ^ sr«Tc?!^5r 

!I?!T 3Tr5R?T« 9«!f qf^?r 1 1” 

— f%f «T 



HISTORY 

OF THE 

HINDU MAHASABHA 



OUR PAST 


Ft seems superfluous to dwell on the achievements 
of tlie Hindus in the History of nations. Lord Ourzon 
who cannot be accused of sympathy with Indian 
aspirations said in liis address at the Delhi Durbar in 
1901 : ‘‘Powerful empires existed and flourished here^ 
while the Englishmen were still wandering painted in 
the woods and while the British colonies were still a 
wilderness and a jungle. India has left a deeper mark 
on the history, the philosophy and religion of mankind, 
than any other ten'estrial unit in the universe.” 
Prof. Max. Muller in his well-known book, “What 
India has to Teach us/’ says, “If I were asked 
ujider what sky the human mind has more fully 
developed some of its choitM^st gifts; has thought must 
deeph’" the problems of life and has found solutions 
of some of them, which will desei've the attention even 
of those who have studied Plato and Kant, I should 
point to India; if 1 were to ask myself how we here in 
Europe may draw the corrective which is most wanted 
in order to make our inner life more perfect, more 
univr^rsal, in fact more truly human, again I should 
point to India ” 



4 


In fact, the Hindus were not only the earliest 
people who developed a high type of civilisation and 
disseminated it to the various parts of this earth but 
were the first great colonisers of the world. There is 
enough evidence to show that they colonised Babylon, 
Assyria, Egypt, Greece and on the other side they 
spread so far as the Phillipine Islands, 

In spite of the destructive march of the Mohamma- 
dan conquest and propaganda, Hindu influence is 
traceable in Arabian lands, in Persia, in Afghanistan, 
The buried cities and villages in Central Asia deserts 
are yielding proofs of Hinduism in those centres of 
population, now depopulated. Tibet, China* Corea, 
and Japan were greatly indebted to Hindusthan. The 
literature extant in Java and Bali was bom of Hindu 
influence and relates to the Sanskrit epics and the 
Purans. The Hindus had thus, in fact, attained the 
high position of Jagatgura. 

Prom such heights they fell into the depths of 
slavery and foreign subjection. The fall was really a 
terrible fall. During these days of alien rule, the 
history of Hindusthan, is a tragic account of Hindus, 
slain, of the intolerant measures, of the temples razed, 
and mutilated, of forcible conversions and marriages, of 
proscriptions and oonfi.scations, of murders, massacres 
and of the sensuality and drunkenness of the tyrants 
who enjoyed them. 



5 


OUR VIRILin 

We faced all those national disas^.ers. How nicely 
Swatantrya-vir Bar, V. D. Savarkar, in his presidential 
address at Ahmed abad Session summarises the situa- 
tion, saying, ^‘But each time we rose and tided them 
over. The Greeks under Alexander, the great, came 
conquering the world but they could not conquer 
Hindusthan. Chandragupta rose and we drove the 
Greeks back inflicting crushing defeats on them, 
military and cultural. Three centuries after, the Huns 
came on us like ^n avalanche. All Europe and half 
Asia lay at their feet. They smashed the Roman 
Empire to pieces. But after some two centuries of a 
life and death struggle against them we vanquished 
them in the end under our Vikramaditya, the Great. 
The Shakas also fared no better. The mighty hands of 
Shalivahan and Yashodharman beat them a chip. 
Where are those of our enemies — the Huns and the 
Parthians and the Shakas — today ? Their very names 
are forgotten I Gone, effaced from the face of Hindus- 
than and the world as well. The virility and the 
staying out power of our race triumphed over 
them all. 

Then centuries after Mahommedans invaded 
Hindusthan and carried everything before them. Their 
kingdoms and Empires seemed to reign supreme I 

Though Hindus were divided and disintegrated, 



suffered defeats and courted liumiliations but for full 
six hundred years throughout the Muslim ascendanc}^ 
they carried on a life and death struggle to regain 
their national honour and ^lory. At last the fc:^ikh 
sword in the North, Maratthas in the South and the 
Rajputs in the Central Hindusthan completely shatter- 
ed the Moghal Empire and re-established Hindu sway 
all over Hindusthan right up to the bank of Attak/' 
Veer Savarkar further goes on to sa3", '‘But we rallied 
again and ever since the day that Shiva jee was born, the 
God of War has sided with us. Battle after battle we 
beat the Moslems in a hundred fields, their Kingdoms 
and Empires, their Nawabs and ShaJias and B'^dshahas 
were brought to their knees by our warriors till at last 
Bhausahib, tlie Commander-in-Chief of the Hindus, as 
if symbolicalh^ raised his Hammer and literally smash- 
ed the very Imperial throne of the Moghals at Delhi 
to pieces; Mahadajee Shinde held the imbecile Moghal 
Emperors as prisoners and pensioners in his custody 
and Hindu supremacy was once more re-established 
all over the land.*' 

In the meanwhile, before we could recover from 
the struggle of centuries with Moslems, the English 
faced us and won on all points. We could not even 
find time to consolidate what we had heroicalh^ 
snatched from the Muslims^ hands. We fell an easj^ 
prey to the British sword. But. not long afterwards. 



once again the people of Hindusthaii rose against the 
British Domination. This time they suffered a heavy 
defeat and Hindusthan went completely under the 
Britivsh sway. 


ADVENT OF CONGRESS 

The British brought with them the Western 
system of Governmentj and an alien faith in the form 
of Christianity. They opened schools and colleges to 
impart education which was meant to enslave the very 
convictions of our people. This all resulted in comp- 
lete Westernization of Hindusthanees. But all this 
could not check the growing national consciousness of 
our people and a sort of dis-satisfaction was assuming 
the form of an under current in the political future of 
Hindusthan. At this moment, the British contrived 
another trap, the secret of which Mr. Hume, the 
founder of the Indian National Congress revealed to 
Lord Auckland Colvin in a letter thus, “A safety-valve 
for the escape of great and growing forces, generated 
by the British connexion was urgently needed and no 
more efficacious valve tlian tlie Congress could be 
devised.” The few select persons who undertook to 
guide the political destiny of Hindusthan at that 
time, had very little knowledge and experience of the 
antecedents and inclinations of different peoples inha- 
hitin'T the country and like the old-world philospher® 



8 


of Greece, they first fixed upon a political theory of 
building up a new nation out of the heterogeneous 
elements to be found here, and then thought of setting 
up a machinery to carry that theory into practice. 
The ideal of a new nationalism was set up before the 
country; and the newly created educated class and 
the newly established press were made its advocates. 
For the last fifty years and more, this ideal of national- 
ism has been moving the whole country and has been 
our most cherished possession. Our one aim has, there- 
fore, been to form ourselves into a nation, fit to take 
charge of and control our destinies. The new political 
theory looked very bright and very attractive at first. 
The spirit of nationalism had grown up in European 
countries, and had been working wonders for the last 
two or three centuries in the creation of new 
nations of Europe. Naturally we were led to think 
why we could not become a nation like those of Europe. 
Where do we stand after a continuous labour of more 
than fifty years? All^ the efforts of the Congress 
school of political thought have ended in utter failure, 

hold out any better 
pxOiiaiseXQJ^^ future. We have not succeeded in 
reaching our goal, as yet and it is even today as 
fartiier away from us as ever. On the contrary, the 
state of affairs, we find ourselves in, at present, is subs- 
tantially piuch worse than what it was, when we firsi 



besran to march on the road of nationalism. At one 
time we hugged the illusion that we were to reach our 
goal soon, but the next moment we were made to feel 
that our destination was as remote as ever, and that 
all our race had been in vain. 

TWO PROPHECIES 

Even in 1909, men like R. B. Lala Lai Chand in 
the Punjab and Lt. Col. U. N. Mukerji in the Bengal 
after witnessing the activities of the Indian National 
Congress eveli for a period of about fifteen years, 
came to these bitter but correct conclusions. “My 
objections against the Congress,’* observes R. B. L. 
Lai Chand, “however, are of a different hue. In the 
first ])lace — and this is the strongest and most serious 
objection — the Congiress proceeded on a wrong^ assump- 
tion of a united nation. T|;te.xesi4lt was.ttot 
ignored the Hindu aspect of public amd pQfitiq^l ques- 
tions. This fallacy was taken advantage of by the 
other community to press their vantage point, and, in 
the end the Hindus lost heavily. They incurred the 
whole odium for the distasteful work from the Govern- 
ment point of view, and when the time came for 
rewarding the labours a little, the substantial portion 
of the reward was assigned to the other community. 
Not only this, but they were given a political impoii}- 
ance which they never po.ssessed before, wliile Hiurlus 



10 


we^ie lowered in the scale from the position which they 
had already occupied, xind with all these events 
passing before their eyes, the Congress through its 
mouthpiece, the Indian Congress Committee, moved 
not a little finger to render support or help to the 
Hindu cause. Nay it did not even condescend to give 
an encouragement to the community in the struggle. 
On the other hand, its main exponent tried to gag the 
Hindu mouth against even raising a lament. A move- 
ment is judged by it results, just as a tree by its fruits. 
A tree, however, bright and beautiful it may be in 
form and figure, yet if it bears bitter or poisonous fruits 
will be shunned and avoided. The Congress may possess 
very high ideas of a united India, admirable to 
look at from a distance, but if the result be bitter I 
cannot conceive how a Hindu, who has the h ast spark 
left in him of warmth of Hindu feeling and patriotism, 
can help and join the movement. 

“Even apart from the question of political loss or 
gain, my objection against the Congress is that it 
makes the Hindu forget that he is a Hindu and tends 
to swamp his communal individuality into an Indian 
ideal, thus making him break with all his past tradi- 
tions and past glory. I regard this as a very heavy 
price to pay. The conversion to the new ideal means 
worse than the effects of foreign invasions that have 
hitherto hammered the Hindu community. During 



11 


these times, in spite of very oppressive circumstances, 
the Hindus have maintained intact their communal 
organisation, and why they should now voluntarily 
surrender and abandon the same passes my comprehen- 
sion. Moreover, the other community has steadfastly 
refused to join hands, and under the circumstances it 
appears to me to be pure imbecility and cowardliness 
to appear under a united flag. 

set up by the C9ggpss was not ^ only erroneous to 
start with, but it has become bo^possible under the dec- 
lared hostile at^tuda qL the pther comipwity. The 
only possible, nay honourable, course under the cir- 
cumstances in fact is to start anew on a fresh basis, 
abandoning, if imt pulling down, the fabric which 
instead of giving political shelter and refuge has 
exposed the community to winds and hailstorms from 
every quarter.'’ 

Lt. Col. U. N, Mukerji has also thus depicted a very 
sad tale, in his book, Dying Race ; We, Hindus, 
are most ridiculously, most contemptibly ignorant. 
We have no idea about *what is going on around 
us. Others are not quite so ign >rant. In the course 
of his reply to the All India Moslem League, referred 
to before — "the Secretary of State for India told 
the deputation: T know very well, that any injust- 
ice, any suspicion that We are capable of being unjust 
to the Mohammadans in India would certainly 



12 


have a very severe and injurious reaction in Cons- 
tantinople.’ I wonder how many Hindus understand 
the significance of this utterance. A few days later he 
took the opportunity to proclaim from his place in the 
House of Lords that ‘all the demands of the Muhamm- 
adans will be met with in full.’ This was practically 
at the bidding of two Muhammadans, one of whom 
could scarcely be an Indian. But the English statesmen 
knew that at the back of these two individuals there 
was the solid mass of nearly 70 millions of Indian 
Muhammadans who were waiting for the reply. 

“How do the two communities stand to-day? The 
Muhammadans have a future and they believe in it, 
we Hindus have no conception of it. Time is with 
them — time is against us. At the end of the year 
they count their gains, we calculate our losses. They 
are growing in number, growing in strength, growing 
in health, growing in solidarity, we are crumbling to 
pieces. They look forward to a united Mohammadan 
world — we are waiting for our extinction. 

‘^The wages of sin is death. We Hindus have 
sinned deeply, damnably, against the laws of God and 
nature} and we are paying the penalty. 

“In our treatment of our co-reKgionists lies 
the germ of our self-destruction. This is the 
history of the ttindus. The saihe process is going on 
around us.” 



It Is, however, a pity that the Bengal Hindus, who 
now in a very sad plight, ignored the note of 
warning given by Col. Mukerji, just as the Hindus 
of the Punjab ignored the warning of late Lala 
Lai Cliand. 



THE PRO-MUSLIM POLICY 

Soon after the partition of Bcno'al and the establish* 
meiit of the Muslim Leiig-ue a pro-Muslim poliey was 
initiated by the Government. Riots by Mohammedans 
became the order of the day with the result that 
Hindus^ men and women, were maltreated and out- 
raged. None of our leaders did anything to mitigate 
the sufferings of their Hindu brethren. They wer(‘ 
busy with hatching schemes for and producing ex- 
panded Legislative Councils. They believed that 
those were the sole remedies for all Indian sufferings. 
The result was that Hindu nationality and Hindu 
sentiments were gradually obliterated and thrown in 
the back-ground. The origin of Hindu national move- 
ment can best be described in the forceful woixls of 
Shri Bhai Parmanandji when he goes on to say, ‘‘To 
understand the genesis of the Hindu National Move- 
ment we must go back to 1909, the year of the 
inauguration of the Minto-Morley reforms. In 1906 
the Moslem League wms established at Dacca and for 
the first time in British Indian History, communal 



15 


representation for the Muslims found statutory enact- 
ment in the reforms of 1909. That year which future 
historians will consider as fateful in Indian history, 
saw tlie beginning of a policy of increasing disregard 
for Hindu interests by the Government and the dis- 
ap])earance of the feeling of unity on the part of 
Muslims with their Hindu countrymen. The Congress 
on that occasion, even as it does to-day, considered 
the attitude of the Muslims as a temporary phase in 
their political evolution. R. B. Lai Chand had the 
proud distinction of being the first in this country to 
foresee that it was not a temporary phase. It has lasted 
nearly twenty years and the anti-national philosophy 
of the Muslims is daily gaining ground. R. B. 
Lai Chand discerned in the mist of political forces which 
surrounded him, the direction in which the Congress 
was drifting. He clearly perceived that although the 
Congress was mainly composed of Hindus, yet it strove, 
under a mistaken view of Muslim psychology, against 
Hindu interests. In politics it was a tragic act of self- 
abnegation on the part of the Hindus. 

THE FIRST HINDU CONFERENCE 

‘Hn 1911, at the first Hindu Conference held under 
the auspices of the Punjab Hindu Sabha at Amritsar, 
R. B. Lai Chand was elected Chairman of the Recep- 
tion Committee. The Conference was attended by 
nearly every Hindu of importance in the Puiijab and it 



was only during the War that the activiticis of the 
Hindu Sabha ceased. 

‘Hn 1912 R. B. Lai Chand, to whom the Hindus owe 
an incalculable debt of gratitude for the work he difl 
for them and for the unfailing guidance he gave 
them, died.” 

It was the Punjab that kept the flame of Hindu 
nationalism burning upto 1917, until the repressive 
policy of the Punjab Grovernment during the time of 
the great War placed a check on almost every move- 
ment in the Punjab. 

The contemptible Lucknow Pact came into being in 
1916 recognising the existence of “various separate 
communities whose interests could only be safe-guarded 
by proposing communal electorate and weightage in 
representation to Muslims in their minority provinces 
with acceptance of permanent statutory Moslem 
majority in the Punjab and Bengal.” Such a step was 
taken by the Congress to bait the Muslim commu- 
nity for coalescing their separate entity into Indian 
national unity. 

ORIGIN OF THE HINDU MAHASABHA 

It was in the same year that Pandit Dev Ratan 
Sharma returned from the Lucknow Session of the 
Congress. He had been to the Punjab in the days of 
R. B. Lai Chand — a foremost man in the Punjab, (»f 



17 


sterling worth and clear political foresight and deep 
devotion to the Hindu Cause. He saw how the Cong- 
ress and its leaders deceived the Hindus by their for- 
mal acceptance of the principle of nationalism and 
joint electorates whereas in practice they proved so 
cowards, weak and timid that their own pens signed 
the principle of national disintegration and allegiance 
to separate electorates. 


The Hindu lethargy, as usual was a hard nut to 
crack. The Lucknow Pact at least opened their eyes 
and in 1918— ’19 we find the Hon’ble L. Sukhbir 
Singh working as tlie General Secretary and Pandit 
Deva Eatan Sharma working as the Secretary of 
the Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Sabha at its Annual 
general meeting held at Hardwar. 


The necessity of such an organisatitn has been 
keenly felt for several years past. In Decembe r 
a.t. a. mft Pit.hifr of the, leading — Hindus hald. 
n.t. — dikp.idftd that au All-Indi a 

Hindu Maiiasabl ia should be formed itg 

KSd^arters at Allahabad. The objects and the 
rules of the Sabha were settled, the office bearers 
were elected, but owing to diverse reasons no 
jwactical steps could be taken to make the Sabha 
a reality. 

The Hon’ble R. B. Shadi Lai (now Sir) in the course 
of his inaugural address delivered by him at the 2nd 


IS 


Punjab Hindu Conference held at Delhi (it being a par^^ 
of the Punjab in those days) in P)12, urging the ne-^® 
cessity of an All India Hindu Sabha, remarked “Suffice^^ 
it to say that the events of the past four or five years 
proved beyond the shadow of doubt that with a 
body which could speak with tlie authority of the 
entire Hindu Community beliind its back and resist 
the aggressive action of the Muslim T.eague, the Hindus ^ 
would not have been in the plight in which they find y 
themselves at present. 1 

“I appeal to the Hindus of tlie Punjab, to the 
Hindus of Hindusthan, to conbine and consolidate 
forces for the future good of the country.^’ 

From the record, which we have been able to trace, 
we only find that the organizers of the Hindu Maha 
Sabha used to call annual sessions of the Akhil 
Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha at Hardwar, generally 
omthe occasions of certain annual fairs. The Head 
'Office of the Hindu Mahasablia was located at 
Hardwar. 

The fifth Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Conference was 
held at Delhi under the ’distinguished presidentship 
of the Hon’ble Raja Sir Rampal Singh K.C.I.E. of 
Kurri Sadhauli on the 26, 27 and 28fch December, 1918. 
The Subjects Committee formed consisted of repre- 
sentative gentlemen belonging to different provinces of 
the whole of Hindusthan. 



19 


INDIFFERENCE 0F THE CONGIESS 

The aimual session was over but it brought home to 
the people one bitter truth. Those who attended clear- 
ly realised the apathy and indifference of the Congress 
towards the Hindns. The Congress, the only political 
machinery in the country would not take up their 
cause because from the very commencement it had 
assumed to itself a sentimental ideal and was now 
afraid to climb down, happen what may, even though 
the situation mjiy result in disaster to the Hindus. 
The Hindu leaders and the Hindu Press were then (and 
are even now) wedded to the Congress cry and equally 
hesitant to advocate purely Hindu interests. The 
Hindu Sabha Movement with various vicissitudes — rises 
and falls, continued, though, the Hindu remained 
spectator of his own ruin. 

THE MON-CO^QPERATION AND KHILAFAT 
MOVEMENTS 

In 1920, side by side with the introduction of 
reform in the Government of India, we meet with 
two different movements. The first is the non-co- 
operation movement, started Mahatma Gandhi 
taken up by the Indian National Congress, and second 
that of the KhilafaS Riming at bringing the Mohamme* 
dan community round to make common cause wifit the 
Congress. The underlying idea of the Khiiafat aaieve- 



20 


mentwas.to preach to the Mohammedan community 
in Hindusthan that the destruction of the Califate 
meant the destruction of Islam and that for this the 
British Government were responsible. The non-co- 
operation and the Khilafat movements held the field 
for a period of about two years. 

By this time Tilak had died. The reigns of the 
leadership of the Indian National Congress passed into 
the hands of Mr- Gandhi. Moderate in his views 
even up to the Amritsar Congress, he grew extremist. 
He plunged himself whole-heartedly in the Khilafat 
Movement, hugged by the illusion of Hindu-Muslim 
unity which he was burning to purchase at any 
cost to turn the Satanic Government out of 
Hindusthan, He held a promise to the Indians 
to win Swarajya for them within a year, if they 
would blindly follow him. More than a crore of rupees 
were collected. Civil Disobedience was started and 
Mr. Ganhhi so wedded himself with the Khilafat 
Movement that he attended their all India Conferences, 
guided their deliberations and in his earnestness was 
instrumental to send a pious invitation to Amanullah 
the then King of Afghanistan to invade and conquer 
Hindusthan for the Muslims. But his dreams remain- 
ed unrealised. He failed and failed miserably. 

The crisis had been reached by the end of the year 
1921 and the beginning of 1922. The Bardoli pro- 



21 


gramme and Mass Civil Disobedience had been sus- 
pended as a result of the Chauri-Ohaura Riot and 
wide-spread reaction had begun to set in throughout the 
country on account of the postponement of the Swaraj 
expected within the year. But Mustapha Kemal 
had saved Turkey and raised the dignity of the Islamic 
world, and Indian Mussalmans fully roused and 
organised were seeing the visions of Pan-Islamism, 
Muslim Federation and a chain of Islamic territories 
with India in it. Just then a spark was let in the 
extreme South* which was but the precursor of great 
events to follow in quick succession leading to the 
present (Hindu) Renaissance. 

THE MOPLA ATROCITIES 

The fanatic Moplas of Malabar, who as a result of 
the intense Khilafat propaganda carried on amongst 
them, had been dreaming of Khilafat Raj throughout 
the year and preparing for the same, at last declared 
that the Khilafat Raj had come. And, in keeping with 
the usual Islamic history of the past, in Order to inaugu- 
rate the Khilafat Raj, they began forcible conversions 
of Malabar Hindus on large scale, lopping off tufts of 
hair on their heads, forcing circumcision, looting 
Hindu houses, raping Hindu ladies and perpetrating 
blood-curdling atrocities of the most inhuman and 
shameful type. 





This was the first gi’eat shock to the thiukiog 
Hindus during the period of the Congress and Khila- 
fat boom and the reminder of the early achievements 
of the Khilafat during its palmy days in Hindusthan. 
But if one Jallian-wala tragedy and the shocked 
conscience of Mr. Gandhi were needed to rouse the semi- 
awakened Indians into full consciousness; not one Mala- 
bar but a series of Malabars and the shocked dis-illusion- 
ment of an inspired Malaviya and Shraddhanand were 
needed to rouse the sleeping consciousness of the great 
Hindu Nation— dulled, deadened and suppressed within 
two centuries by the disappearance of that constant 
teri'or and direct social and religious humiliation com- 
bined with political servitude which was the character- 
istic of the previous rule, and very nearly killed by 
the mistaken guidance of its own great patriots 
and leaders. 

If a Das and Nehru were needed to give impetus 
to the movement inaugurated by Mr. Gandhi — a 
Lajpat, Bhaiji, Moonje, Kelkar and Jayakar were auto- 
matically dragged into this Renaissance giving to it 
the full lustre of their name, support of their influence 
and the vigour of their activity. 

To return to Malabar. The Mopish atrocities 
resulted in awful suffering, humiliation and indignity 
to tho Malabar Hindus. There was no AlHndia 
organisation to look to the Malabar Hiad«|» in thahr 



23 


distress and raise a word of protest or appeal on their 
betialf. Arya Samajists from Punjab^ however, 
went to Malabar and offered relief. There was more- 
over one Hindu heart into which the dart pierced into 
the hearts of the Malabar Hindus was felt ^*dth the 
same poignant anguish* It was that of Moonje* 

He proceeded straight to Malabar to see things 
with his own eyes and find out if the ^^oeful tale of 
the atrocities perpetrated by th^ Moplahs ’'*^as really 
true* And what Dr. Moonje saw on reaching there 
moved him to tears and affected him deeply* 
He found that all that had leaked out for the 
papers of the country, was but a small fraction 
of the horrible sufl'erings which the Hindus there 
had to undergo and, that the Congress Enquiry 
Committee had busied itself more with white- 
washing the entire affair than scolding the Moplahs 
and administering relief to the looted, oppressed, 
humiliated and forcibly converted Hindus. Unfor- 
tunately to suppress the details of this tragedy, 
was also considered politic in national interests. The 
Malabar tragedy thus opened the eyes of a veteran Mar- 
hatta Hindu Nationalist — ono of the -chief lieutenants 
of the Lokamanya and a stalwart of the Congress 
and Swaraj in Maharashtra^ — to the cause of the 
Hindu Renaissance. But the Renaissance was Just 
beginning and much had yet to iollow* After the 



24 


Malabar tragedy the Hindus slept on and the Qongress 
Hindu leaders resun^ed their complacence. But this 
Vas not to be. 

Hindu self-oblivion had nearly reached the point of 
self -extinction and the Unseen Hand begun to shape 
the course of events in order to awaken those whose 
sleep it could no longer tolerate. 

THE MULTAN TRAGEDY 

Malabar was followed by Multan where also worst 
excesses were perpetrated by the Mussalmans over the 
helpless Hindus whose life, honour and property-^noue 
considered too sacred nor spared. But, there was no 
Hindu organisation to look after its people, and to 
speak, agitate, or fight on their behalf. The only 
great organisation— the Congress— appointed again a 
Committee of Enquiry and Pandit Madan Mohan 
Malaviya, Babu Rajendra Prasad and some others pro- 
ceeded to the spot in the company of Hakim Ajmal 
Khan and other Mohomedan leaders. 

The details of the Multan tragedy could not be 
hushed up like that of Malabar which was far removed 
from Northern Hindusthan nor could the full blajse of 
publicity be avoided. Not only the Hindu Congress 
leaders whose enquiry might be considered prejudiced 
because they happened to be Hindus but, Hakimji and 
all the .Mohomedan leaders on the spot had to openly 



and unliesitatingly admit that the fault lay entirely 
with the Mahomedans and had to liang their heads 
with shame at the fiendish excesses of the Multan 
Muslims. 

NEED OF SANGATHAN 

During the course of their Enquiry and verification 
Pt. Malaviya and the Hindu leaders came across inci- 
dents too heart-rending and humiliating to mention. 
They tlien clearly and unhesitatingly declared to the 
Hindu aiid Mussalman Congress leaders that there was 
no other remedy for such regrettable happenings when 
Hindus were invariably found unable not only to save 
their property but even their honour and relision than 
‘‘Hindu Sangatfian” — the organisation and solidarity of 
the Hindus. Not content with foretelliag the dawn of 
this Renaissance. Pt. Malaviyaji actually ushered and 
fathered it at Multan by addressing the Hindus there 
and making this solemn declai’atioii, 

^iTime after time has Pt. Malaviyaji along with Swami 
Shraddhanandji, Calaji and all the prominent leaders 
of the Renaissance been maligned and attacked by 
the Mussalmans and the Congress-minded Hindus. 
They were charged with sinister and selfish motives. 
They, however, have remained cool, calm and firm. 

But an outburst of Muslim fury in Multan was 
followed by Saharaupur where the same tales of woes 
and sufferings vrere repeated. 



•i(i 


Each succeeding nail driven into the Hindu heart 
kept the Hindus aghast and helpless. Hut this was 
the first and simply a mild phase of the Renaissance. 
It needed more violent eruptions of nature to shake 
them up from deep lethargy. 



THE DAWN OF RENAISSANCE 

The third «rid active phase or the real tangible 
dawn of die Renaissance began with the year 19215 in 
a manlier and out of an incident which w^as neither 
foreseen nor dreamt of. We shall depict the picture 
in the following words of Sliri Swami Shraddhanand 
himself with whose entry henceforth begins tlie 
lienaissnnco : 

*Tn the la.^1 week of 1922 A, 1)., while the anni- 
versaries ()f the Indian National Congress^ the Khilafat 
and its accessories weiv being held with great ^eclat’ 
in tlio pr^^'^enci^ o{ thousniuls at Gaya, the All India 
Ksliatriya Mahasaldia met quietly at Agra and without 
any luss ])assed a resolution approving of the taking 
back of four and a half lakhs of Muslim Rajputs within 
their brotherhood The Ksliatriya Mahasabha in its 
sitting on 31st December 1922 under the guidance of 
Sir Nahar Singh, K.G.I.E., the Rajadhiraj of Shahpura 
in Mewar passed the above resolutions. But all these 
resolutions had an academic value only. Early in 
January 1923, a Hindu Weekly gave the simple news 
that four and a half lakhs of Mahomedan Rajputs had 



applied for reconversion into Hindnisin and that the 
Mahasabha had granted their application. 

“The Mahomedans were roused to action. The first 
protest meeting, that I know of was held in Patti \ illa 2 ;e 
in the Lahore district. Maulvies made llery speeches and 
threatened to dash tlie Hindu Muslim unity to pieces if 
the Hindus dared to tamper with the Malakana Eajjnits'’ 
adherance to Islam. A report of the I^itti meeting 
appeared in the Maliomedan flaily A^akiP of Amritsar 
in »ts issue of 17th January. PJ2H. By the fourth 
week of that month some dozens of Muslim preachers 
belonging to defferent ])roselytising bodies were ai 
work in the different Malakana villages of Agra, 
Muttra and Bharatpur. By the bi^ginning of 
February more rhaTi 50 MoTilavif*s were at work and 
they had all organised themselves under a strong body 
of Ulemas. 

“ft was tlieii and then only' that the Hindu (‘imm- 
unity' was shaken to its bones and began to open its 
sleepy e\-es. Less than half a dozen Kaj])ut and other 
volunteers went round to see the actual state of affairs 
and a conference of the representatives of the different 
Hindu and Rajput Sabhas was called for 13th February 
1923. To that Conference I too was invited^ The 
Bharatiya Hindu Suddhi Sabba was established and a 
Managing Committee was constituted, of which I was 
elected the president. 



9 


“I left Agra for Delhi the same evening with ins- 
tructions to draw up an appeal for men and money 
and to place it for approval before the first meeting 
of the Managing Committee. I drafted an appeal and 
went to Agra to place it before the Managing Commit- 
tee in the meeting which was to take place in the 
evening of 20th February, 1923. 

‘^The Malkanas were takeii back to the Hindu fold 

their Hindu brethren in the presence of a thousand 
of guests from outside.’' 

This is liovv the great Swami Shraddhanand, 
tlie hero and idol of Delhi duriug the Non-co- 
operation days — just on his re]l:^.^♦‘ from jail after 
his incan.'eration in coJiJiection with the (xurii-ka- 
Bagh affair — was siiddenlv aiui inadvertently drawn 
into a new mission which on the on^^ hand was 
destined to be one of the prime and immediats causes 
of the Hindu llenaissaiu^e. JVlen and money began 
to flow for Shuddlii work from all sides. 

Not only the Mussalmans of all types from the 
Khilafatist and the Muslim [jeaguer down to the rabid 
Moulavi and the man in the street were provoked, 
blit Hindu leaders of the Congress were equally 
irritated beyond limit. Mr. Gandhi was in Jail and so 
he could not speak. But almost all other prominent 
Congress men and even nationalist . papers cursed 
Swamiji and the Shuddhi wmrk, which they hf^ld, was 



HO 


becoming responsiblf^ for disturbing the smooth atmos- 
phere of Hindu-Muslim unity so necessary for the 
speed}" attainment of the national goal. Sjt. Raj- 
gopalachariar declared that he cared not though all the 
Hindus became Mussalmans if only freedom could bo 
attained. Others spoke in stronger and more recrimi- 
nating tone. So far as the Muslim world was concern- 
ed, it was agitated to the higliest degree and 
henceforth there was no more odious person than 
Swamiji in their eyes against whom open and secret 
propaganda of liate was earned on by the Ali Biotliei’s 
alike ending in his cowardly murder three years later by 
a fanatic Mussalman, set up according to all (a)ncniTeiit 
signs and informations by a setTci Muslim organisation. 

Ill the meantime months had roiled on after the 
special session of tlie Gaya Hindu Maliasabha held tlmre- 
on and it was feared lhat Pamiit Madan Mohan 
Malaviyaji may not forget to fulfil the jirornise he had 
made at Gaya of convening in the neai* future a most 
representative session of tlie Hindu Maliasabha. Mala- 
viyaji was requested and reminded amongst others by 
Swamiji himself and at last preparations for holding 
the memorable Benares Sesvsion of the Hindu Maha- 
sabha in the month of August 192d, began. 

THE FATEFUL BENARES SESSION 

The Benares Session of the Hindu Maliasabha was 
held in August 1923 in the great compound and 



specially decorntecl paiidal of the old Central Hindu 
College. For tlie first time during the history of the 
last two hundred years did the real Hindu ‘Chetan«’ 
seem to have roused to its utmost depths after its deep 
and long slumber (>f self-oblivion. 1,500 delegates 
besides thousands of visitors had assembled from every 
come]’ of the country to pay their homage to the rising 
sun of the Renaissance. Tlie Sikhs, the Jains, the 
Buddhists, the ParsieSjhhe Sanatanists and the Arya- 
Samajists — the IkanditvS, the non-Pandits, the princes 
and the poor vied alike in their enthusiasm, alfect ion 
and respect for raising the dignity of the Hindus. 
Really, fur once, the Hindu ‘chetana’ had been roused 
and the great Renaissance ushered in that lioliest of 
holy city of the Hindus — the ^Kashi PimyadlianC. 
The Parsi Mr. Nariman was there, the famous Buddhist 
monk and leader Anagarika Dliarmpal was there, the 
Akalis and the IJdasis amongst the Sikhs were there, 
the great Pandits of Madras and the Punjab, Mj^sore 
and other places, besides those of Benares, like the liati- 
bhai Sastri, Pandit Girdhar Sharma, Pandit Dindayal 
Sbarma and oHiers were there. Those who were cons- 
picuous by their absence were the great Hindu leaders 
of the Congress. The Maharaja of Benares was the 
Chairman of the Reception Committee and Pandit 
Madan Mohan Malaviya was Hie Ih’esident. Rules pf 
the Mahasabha were amended and draft resolutions 



were prepared. Proposals for the appointment of 
Committees to arrive at authoritative and progresvsrve 
conclusions with due regard to the need of the times, 
mainly on the questions of removal of untouchability 
and reconversion or Shuddhi were carricnl. 

l^rovincial and Brandi Hindu Sabhas now began to 
be organised. Hindu conferences took place in ditierent 
parts of the country and Hindu opinion now began to 
be educated and organised everywliere. Shuddhi 
work, now formally and finally sanctioned by the 
assemblage of the entire Hindu Society, received 
grea»t impetus and began to be pushed on with still 
greater vigour. 

THE FIRST BOMB OR THE BENGAL HINDU- 
MUSLIM PACT 

While Hindu life-blood thus began to flow into 
the veins of the Hindu body politic, the first bomb 
thrown at it was the Bomb of the Bengal Hindu- 
Muslim Pact entered into by the late Deshbandhu 
O. R. l)as on account of his own political expediencies. 
By this Pact 60% representation in services in the 
Corporation was reserved for the Muslims. This 
forced, sudden and injurious Pact ushered through the 
Bengal Provincial Congress Committee by the over- 
powering personality of Deshbandhu ©as eshte m 



m 


a great outrage upon Hindu feelings and the whole of 
Hindu’s Hindusthan was beside itself with wrath. 

Lala Lajpat Rai was in jail but he wrote a long 
letter to Mr. C. R. Dass before he went to preside at the 
Gaya Congress. In this he wrote as follows: — ^ ‘There 
is one point more which has been troubling me very 
much of late, and on which I want you to think 
carefully; and that is the question of Hindu-Mohamme- 
dan unity. I have devoted most of my time during 
the last six months to the study of Muslim History 
and Muslim L4w, aud I am inclined to think, it is 
neither possibly ‘ nor practicable. Assuming and 
admitting the sincerity of the Mohammadan leaders 
in the Non-co-operati<.ni movement, I think their reli- 
gion provides an effective bar to anything of the kind 
You remember the conversation, I reported to you in 
Calcutta, which 1 had witli Hakim Ajaml Khan and 
Dr. Kitchlew, There is no finer Mohammadan in 
Hindusthan than Hakim Sahib, but can or any other 
Muslim leader override the Quarn ? I can only hope 
that my reading of Islamic Law is incorrect, and 
nothing would relieve me more than to be convinced 
that it is so. But if it is right, then it comes to this 
that although we can unite against the British, we 
cannot do so to rule Hindusthan on democratic lines 
What is then the remedy ? I am not afraid of seven 
crores of the Mussalmans. but T think the seven crorep 



34 


in Hindusthan plus the armed hosts of Afghanistan, 
Central Asia, Arabia, Mesopotamia and Turkey will 
be irresistible. I do honestly and sincerely believe 
in the necessity or desirability of Hindu-Moslem unity. 
I am also fully prepared to trust the Moslem leaders, 
but what about the injunctions of the Quran and Hadis ? 
The leaders cannot override them. Are we then 
doomed ? I hope not. I hope your learned minds 
and wise heads will find some way out of this 
difficulty.” 

KOHAT TRAGEDY, THE LAST STRAW 

Soon came the Kohat Tragedy as the crowning 
incident in the way of the Renaissance and convinced 
more than ever most of those who had yet remained 
unconvinced of the imperative necessity of immediate 
and effective oraganisation amongst the Hindus. The 
Kohat tragedy is unique for since then Muslim 
fanaticism has repeated such history again and 
again within the annals of recent history — a whole 
population of 20 thousands looted^ pillaged, and 
plundered, moving and migrating, leaving its lands and 
avocations behind, to another area for food and shelter, 
under a Government most organised and up-to-date and 
equipped with all available forces and weapons for 
maintaining law and order. 

Help and sympathy flowed from the farthest Hindu 
comers. The Punjab Hindu Sabha headed by Bhai 



35 


Pannanand and others and the Rawalpindi Hindu 
Sabha rendered most organised and effective relief 
sarvice. Organised Hindu awakening, not raised even 
by Malabar, Multan and Saharanpur, was for the first 
time indignantly raised loud in protest against the 
Kohat tragedy. Pandit Malaviyaji, Bhai Parmanadji 
and other Hindu leaders proceeded to Kohat. had an 
accurate map prepared of the havoc wrought there 
and an appeal for the Kohat Hindu Relief Fund was 
made which met with ready and enthusiastic response. 

THE NEED OF SANGATHAN 

Lala La j pat Rai was on board the ship nearing 
Bombay on his i^eturn journey from foreign travels, 
when he read the thundering news of the Kohat 
tragedy in the “Bombay Chronicle” and other Bombay 
papers. This tragic news greatly affected him and 
as he himself described later on many occasions in 
private conversations he was once for all convinced 
for the necessity of organising the long disorganised 
Hindu nation to be able to protect its life, honour and 
religion from those at least, who were as well or 
as ill-equipped for an attack or quarrel as the 
Hindus. 

Henceforth, L. Lajpat Rai, ever great in his 
patriotism and equally sincere in his feelings for the 
Hindu Nation — was another great convert to the cause 



36 


of the Hindu Renaissance which with the font gfoat 
and earnest leaders at its top now, i. e. Pt. Malaviya, 
Swami Shraddhanand, L. Lajpat Rai and Bhai Parm'a- 
nand and the awakened consciousness of the Hindn 
Nation shocked and smitten again and again by the 
happenings of tragic incidents — bore down all opposi- 
tion before it and carried the Hindu Nation onward 
to its goal of progress. 

A few months after the Benares Session of the 
Hindu Mahasabha, another grand and special Session 
of the Hindu Mahasabha was held on the banks of the 
Ganga at Prayag. Babu Rajendra Prasad ( now in 
the Congress) and L. Lajpat Rai also participated in it. 

The Kohat tragedy had deeply affected Mr. Gandhi 
and rudely shaken his confidence in the professed 
friendship and unity of the Musalmans. Mr. Gandhi 
felt the responsibility of having w^eakened Hindu 
feelings completelj’’ by his activities and of having 
made them repose blind faith in and make the heaviest 
sacrifices for the religion of the Musalmans — in return 
for which rewards had quickly followed from 
Malabar to Kohat. 

The Hindu Congress leaders anxious to retain the 
confidence of Musalmans have always thought it 
necessary to tabbo their own Hindu organisations and 
keep studiously aloof from them, whereas the Musal- 
man has never cared for, nor dreamt that a Hindu 



37 


could get offended at his actively joining his own 
Muslim organisation and has himself always openly 
and actively done so from Ali Brothers, Azad, Ansari 
down to the ordinary Khilafatist or Muslim Leaguer. 
Not only this but at the merest news of a Hindu 
Congressman joining his own Hindu organisation the 
Congress has cursed and blamed him and declared him 
as communal and anti-national. 

The Hindu Mahasabha leaders, then, felt the neces- 
sity of having -their own Press, because without a 
strong Press they could not approach the imagination 
of the masses. Delhi, being the Capital of Hindus- 
than, was selected to be the fittest place. So ‘Hindns- 
than Times’ in English, ‘Tej’ in Urdu, and ‘Arjun’ in 
Hindi were started as daily papers. The only object 
of these journals was to propagate the principles of 
Hindu Sangathan, Shuddhi and Achhut Uddhar. 
Even the Hindu Mahasabha, Vide Resolution No. 6 of 
its Working Committee, dated March 18th, 1927 
granted a handsome loan to the management of the 
Hindusthan Times. 



Thi& work of the Renaissance, however, now wen^ 
On with added vigour. The various riots ending with 
the shocking Kohat tragedy, the awakening created 
by Shuddhi and the dawn of the Renaissance from 
the momentous Benares Session had completely awa* 
kened the whole Northern Hindusthan. The Punjab, 
iDelhi^ U. P., and Behar were now going on ahead. 
Shuddhi work was proceeding in parts of U. P. and the 
Punjab and near about Delhi while work amongst the 
untouchables was being carried on under the guidance 
of Swami Shraddhanand and L. Lajpat Rai through 
different organisations. 

The deeply affected Hindu heart of ShreemaU Seth 
Jugal Kishore Birla had begun to place its unbounded 
generousity in the cause of the Hindu awakening at the 
disposal of Swami Shraddhanand, Pt. Malaviya and 
L. Lajpat Rai. 

In Behar the first Provincial Hindu Conference was 
held under the presidentship of the recently released 
Jagatguru Shankracharya, Swami Bharati Krishna 
Tirtha. Provincial Sabhas were formed in Agra and 



39 


'Oudh and in both these provinces prominent Rajas 
like Raja Sir Rampal Singh, Lt. Col. Raja Durga 
Narain Singh of Tirwa, Raja Meheva and others began 
to take active interest. L! Lajpat Rai, Bhai Parma- 
nand and Dr. Gokalchand Narang began to re-organise 
the Punjab Hindus, The Punjab Hindu Sabha 
organised a number of Provincial Conferences within 
a period of a few years. A Provincial Conference was 
organised at Lahore under the presidentship of Pt, 
Malaviyaji. Pt. Din Dayal presided at the Provincial 
Hindu Conference, held at Kangra and Dr. B. S. Moonje 
at Ambala. Barring the non-Bangali Hindus of 
Calcutta proper, the provinces of Bengal, Assam^ 
Burma and Madras had yet been very little affected 
except by the Knhat tragedy which* too produced only 
a temporary impression on their minds. 

A NEW DANGER 

In the meanwhile Khwaja Hasan Nizami of Delhi 
had brought forth a sensational book which 

purported to teach the Musalmans the quickest and most 
comprehensive ways of converting Kafirs to Islam. 
He sketched out how every Musalman from the lowest 
to the highest, from the fallen prostitute to the Vab'l, 
the Doctor, the Zamindar and the great Nawab could 
help the cause of Islam, i. e, the conv^sion of non- 
Muslims to Islam. 1?he prostitute was required to 



40 


exert her influence on her Hindu paramours for 
bringing them round to Islam, the bangle-seller was 
required to seduce Hindu girls, the Ekka driver to 
seduce away Hindu ladies %nd orphans, the Vakil and 
Doctor to influence their Hindu clients, the Zamindar 
and Nawab by their various influences to bring round 
the Hindu tenants under them to the cause of Islam. 
Strange to say, this mischievous book with its most 
wretched and fallen devices of propagating Islam 
which should have been torn to shreds, denounced and 
discountenanced by the sensible Muslim leaders, found 
silently the largest sale in the Muslim community for 
it fitted in with the mentality of the high and the low 
alike amongst the Musalmans,’who had already begun to 
work on the lines enunciated by it. The shrewd Khwaja 
was now an apostle of Islam and was seated high 
in the hearts of the Muslim community. The Nizam of 
Hyderabad fixed an allowance for him and other Muslim 
States and Zamindars follower! suit. Instances after 
instances of MohameHan Deputy Magistrates, Police 
and Excise Inspectors, Zamindars and Nawabs acting 
on these lines were discovered soon after. 

It was only when a translation of this book was 
incidently published that the eyes of the Hindu com- 
munity were opened and they soon found that secret 
kidnapping, abduction and seduction of Hindu girls and 
orphans by Muslim in almost every town of Northern 



41 


Hindasthan had become the order of the day. Hindus 
individually and through their Hindu Sabhas now 
began to exercise vigilance, detect such dirty attempts, 
rescue Hindu widows, girls and orphans and bring the 
offenders to book. 


OUR COUNTER PROPAGANDA 

The Bombay Provincial Hindu Sabha had been orga- 
nised by Raja Narayanlal Pitti, Pt. Mukunda Mal^^viya 
and others and they had come down to attend the 
Belgaum vSpecial Session of the Hindu Sabha which was 
also organised by them. The next regular session of the 
Hindu Mahasabha was held at Calcutta in the month 
of April. L. Lajpat Eai, who had taken up the movement 
with the courage and earnestness characteristic of him, 
was the Pi'esidc nt-elect and great enthusiasm was being 
felt for tl»e Conference. L. Ijajpat Rai left for Calcutta 
after presiding over the second Behar Provincial Hindu 
Conference at Muzaffarpur where thousands of people 
had gathered. Great enthusiasm had been created owing 
to the advent of Bhai Parmanandji along with Lalaji, 
Sir P. C. Ray was the Chairman of the Reception 
Committee of the Calcutta Session. The Conference 
was a roaring success. 

Iinmediatily after the Calcutta Session, Lalaji 
reached Assam, toured the Province and entrusted 
the work of Hmdn Rs^nsre^than to Mr. T. Phoolron 



with a monthly grant of five hundred rupees. During 
the course of the year Lalaji visited Bombay where a 
Provincial Hindu Conference presided over by him was 
held and Mr. M. R. Jayakar, the Congress veteran - 
leader of Bombay, was drawn into the Hindu 'Mahasabha 
as the President of its Provincial Branch at Bombay. 
He next visited Burma and presided over the first Burma 
Provincial Hindu Conference. This visit of Lalaji 
created a great awakening amongst the Hindus of that 
province. Lalaji visited Sindh and C. P. also that year. 
The Sindh Provincial Hindu Sabha had been firmly 
organised by two of the most prominent Congi'ess 
Hindu leaders of the province. Dr. Choithram and Mr. 
Jairamdas — formerly the trusted lieutenants of Mr. 
Gandhi and who have since then again gone back to the 
Congress — took up the w’ork earnestly with their com- 
panions and co-workers and made it a real, living and 
effective body in those parts. 

The office of the Hindu Mahasabha was located 
from this year at Delhi tn suit the convenience of 
Lalaji and to take advantage of the presence of the 
representatives of the different provinces coming tr* 
attend the sittings of the Legislative Assembly here 
during its Winter Session. The two years previous to 
it had seen the tangible dawn of Renaissance, and this 
year, with the presidentsliip of Lalaji, was laid the 
foundation of the real work of the Renaissance, which 



4B 


has since then gone on steadily in a more and more 
organised shape. 

On the occasion of the Cawnpore Congress in 
December, 1925. another Special Session of the Hindu 
Mahasabha was held, which was presided over by Sjt. 
N. C. Kelkar who had already identified himself with 
the cause of the Eenaissance. 

THE MOMENTOUS DELHI SESSION 

The ninth Annual Session of the Hindu Mahasabha 
was lield at Delhi on the eve of the departure of the 
members of tlie Central Legislatures to their homes. 
General sensation and curiosity was felt in political 
circles, specially in the Congress Camp, about the 
resolutions to be passed in that Session. For Bhai 
Paimanand, one of the most prominent and earnest 
Hindu Sablia leaders, whose name had been recom- 
mended for Presidentship by almost all the Provinces 
and who would have been certainly elected President 
had he not himself chosen to withdraw, had been 
carrying on intense agitation in the papers and on the 
platform asking the Mahasabha to send its own nomi- 
nees to the legislatures as Congress nominees did not 
consider themselves responsible to the Hindu public 
opinion and had failed to guard Hindu interests, where- 
as Mus^^almans always guarded their own separate 
Muslim interests and fought for the same. 



44 


Bliai Parmanand’s arguments were cogent and 
forceful and based on facts too. A good section of the 
Hindu public opinion favoured his views while another 
differed from them. L. Lajpat Rai, till then the Deputy 
Leader of the Swarajya Party, was already disgusted 
with the ‘walk in’ and ‘walk out’ policy of the party but 
was still not prepared to allow the Hindu Mahasabha 
to put its hands directly in the matter. Pt. Malaviya 
was undecided. The dual seemed to be between 
Lalaji and Bhaiji. Almost all the prominent 
Congress Hindu leaders for the first time in the 
history of the Hindu Mahasabha showed their deep 
anxiety to be present at this Session — though only to 
thwart the proposals of Bhaiji. So, several Hindu 
Congressmen came in as delegates and entered the 
Subject Committee for this very purpose, while most 
of the more prominent among them including Sjt. 
Vithalbhai Patel - the Assembly President, Pt. Motilal 
Nehru and others chose to bring about indirect 
pressure upon them by their presence, persuasion, 
assurance, reason and so-forth. 

This Mahasabha Session had therefore gathered a 
peculiar interest round it. The Session was presided 
over by Raja Narendra Nath of Lahore, a liberal and 
moderate in politics, but a man full of the most 
youthful enthusiasm for the Hindu cause inspite of 
his old age. 



45 


The Council Resolution — the resolution of engrossing 
interest during the whole session, was thoroughly 
discussed. Grreat enthusiasm prevailed. The bigs of 
the Mahasabha fired their shots — some on one side 
and some on the other. Bhaiji, Malaviyaji, Lalaji 
and other leaders — all spoke. Bhaiji was the chief 
supporter. Lalaji the chief opposer. 

At last a via media was found with which almost all 
the leaders were some how or other satisfied except 
Bhaiji. The compromise was to the effect that such 
Congress candidates as might be considered harmful to 
the interests of the Hindus in the opinion of the Hindu 
Mahasabha should be opposed and fresh ones nominat- 
ed by the Mahasabha in their place. It will not be 
out of place to pen here that Pandit Mala\iyaji 
supported Bhaiji on this occasion. 

The spirit of Renaissance seemed to have entered 
the society and was evidently lifting it up silently 
and effectively. 

HINDU AWAKENING-A MENACE TO 
BRITISH RAJ 

In the midst of this life and death struggle, the 
Hindus could feel, though very dimly, the very first 
and most preliminary need to realise the importance of 
their individual and collective existence. With them it 



was a keeiier evolution of sf^lf-consoiousnessj forced, 
doubtlessly, by surrounding circumstances and moved 
by collateral pressure. The English statesmen have 
ever been watchful of various tendencies of Hindu mind. 
The Hindu-Muslim unity may bring them, temporarily, 
some fear but what they dread most is not a patched up 
Hindu-Muslim agreement but it is Hindu solidarity and 
Hindu consciousness of self-organisation that concerns 
them very seriously. Tfie Hindu Sablia Movement at 
the time was growing in strength. It liad caught the 
fancy of the masses and appealed to their hearts. Sliud- 
dlii and Sangatliaii v ere becoming the watcdiwords of 
the Hindus, whether high or low. Tlie British statesimm 
who keenly watched the changed mentality and deeply 
read the sure signs of awakening among the Hindu 
society could not help giving vent to their feelings and 
expressing in an unequivocal terms this ii(3w force as a 
‘menace to British Raj.’ Here we cannot do bettfT 
than quote the very words from a letter of Lai a I^ajpat 
Raiji to Pt. Malavijmji. Lalaji Jia])j)ened to be on 
the board of a ship with an English statesmen, who in 
the course of talk he had with Lalaji could not help 
disclosing what he really felt and believed. The letter 
runs thus : — 

“ I am writing to you about his (the Englishman’s) 
views on our movement - I mean the Hindu movement. 
He seems to be thorough anti-Hindu and holds strong 



47 


views against Sliuddlii and Saiigatlian lil<e Anglo- 
Ijidiaii olYicij^ls. They seem to think that the Shuddhi 
rnoveineiitj if successful, is bound to lead to Hindu Raj. 
I am beginning to think that the Shuddhi movement 
is troubling the Go\trnment for the simyjle reason 
that it threatens to spoil their plans of weakening tlie 
Hindus in numbers and influence. Their chief hopes 
seemed to have so far been on the chance of thinning 
their number with a view eventually to make 
them politically* impotent. This makes all the more 
nescessary for us to do all we can to push on the 
movement.” 




The remarkable and convincing proof of the change 
wrought by the Renaissance in the Hindu society was 
to come now from a quarter least expected, thoroughly 
and fully asleep and stoutly refusing to wake up. 

THE CALCUTTA RIOTS AND THEIR EFFECTS 

Out of the spark lit in one quarter of Calcutta on 
the occasion of tho A.rya Samaj Nagarkirtan, grew up 
a communal fire and frenzy which burnt fiercely and 
violently, unstemmed and uncontrolled, for days send- 
ing forth its flames in all directions, not only through 
Bene-al but through the whole country. And out of 
this fire came out the Hindu gold purified, moulded 
and shining. 

Calcutta alone would have hardly awakened the 
interior of Bengal but the great excesses at Patna and 
over such a wide area in the interior shook the vei'y 
hearts of the Hindus of Bengal who, roused from their 
deep slumber, to a sudden and bitter leabty of the 
situation now looked to the Hindu Renaissance as their 
immediate saviour and listened to its message with 
rapturons attention. Hindn SnhliRR in all parts of 



49 


Bengal had begun to be quickly organised now and 
the visits of the prominent Hindu leaders like Pt. 
Malaviya, Bhai Parmanand and Dr. Moonje followed 
and were hailed with delight. 

The Congress Hindu leaders of Bengal kept almost 
entirely Aoof and no prominent Bengal Hindu 
Congress leader espoused the great cause. Yet Wth 
the firmness, sincerity and sacrifice of the rank and file, 
supported and helped by the Bengal Hindu Sabha and 
Hindu public, the Mahasabha and the rest of the 
Hindus in the country kept on the struggle sustained 
and unabated. 

The Mussalmans of the whole country, including 
their such prominent nationalists as Maulanas Moham- 
med Ali & Shaukat Ali and Hakim Ajmal Khan, nc^ to 
speak of others, were beside themselves with rage on 
hearing of the Muslim reverses at Calcutta and Kharag- 
pur and a momentous Session of the All India Khilafat 
Conference was soon convened at Delhi where Khilafat- 
ists, assembled, lost all control over themselves. The 
Ali Brothers threw an open challenge to the whole 
Hindu Community. Even a cool and cautious man 
like Hakim Ajmal Khan lost his self-control. 

Hindus were now able to learn that so long as they 
are the sufferers in the riots, Mussalman leaders keep 
quiet and by t];Leir silence ancj^ most of them even, by 
their active connivance and secret support encourage 



50 


the rioters. But when it is their own turn to suffer 
they cannot, like the Hindu nationalists, keep silent 
and watching, but will immediately stand up sword 
in hand to fight for their self-assertion. 

Dr. Kitchlew of Amritsar, who had, on release from 
jail, first made pious utterances and declai^tions for 
achieving communal unity, was now working heart 
and soul for the organisation of the Mussalmans 
through his newly started ‘Tanzim’ and ^Tabligh’ 
movement. Not satisfied with the activities of the Mus- 
lim League, the Khilafat, and the Jamaitul Ulema, the 
Doctor named and started his ‘Tanzim’ and ‘Tabligh’ 
movement as an exact reply to the ‘Sanghathan’ 
and ^Shuddhi’ movement of the Hindus. 

THE ELECTIONS OF 1926 AND THEIR RESULTS 

The rest of the year of 1926, from August 
to November, was taken up by the busy election 
fights in which the whole country including 
the leaders, workers and the people of both the 
communities were utterly engrossed, either as 
party leaders ox as candidates, supporters, can- 
vassers, workers, voters and so on. The Hindu 
Mahasabha had decided not to nominate its own 
candidates bnt fight the elections generally interfering 
only where Hindu interests so demanded. But the 
general dissatisfaction with the policy of the Swaraj* 



51 


party and its pro-Muslim attitude lead at last to 
the formation of two other political parties within 
the Congress^ allied to each other but opposed to tke 
Swaraj party — ^Responsivist and Independent Congress 
parties — one led by Pt* Malaviya and Mr. Jayakar and 
the other by Lalaji* Both were opposed to the ‘ walk out’ 
policy of the Swaraj party and its anti-Hindu and pro- 
Muslim attitude in all matters generally. Hindu Sabha- 
ites were all with Pt. Malaviyaji and LalajL Leaders of 
the S waraj party^ the Responsivist and the Independent 
Congress parties and of the Hindu Mahasabha, such as 
Pt, Motilal Nehru^ Pandit Malaviya, Lala Lajpat Rai, 
S wami Sliraddhanand, Bhai Parmanand, Dr, Moonje and 
others visited towns and provinces one after another. 
Sensation went on increasing everywhere and was at 
its highest pitch during the last days of the Elections, 
Some of the most sensational elections like that of Lalaji 
ill the Punjab and Seth Ghanshamdas Birla in the 
U. P., not to speak of many others highly interesting 
in their own way, were fought and won qr lost by the 
opposite parties. The result of these elections in all 
those provinces, where Hindu feeling had gathered 
strength and where they had organised themselves, prov*^ 
ed clearly that Hindu feeling was dissatisfied both with 
the general policy of Swaraj party and with its attitude 
in matters affecting Hindu interests. Pandit Motilal’s 
Swaraj Party was broken down in his own dtadeli the 



62 


tr. P. where, both in the Councils and in the Assembly, 
the Pesponsivists and Indepetidents or Hindu Sabhaites 
came out not only on equal terms but more victorious 
inspite of the stoutest opposition. Similar was the case 
in 0. P., where the Independents and Responsivists won 
the majority ''f the seats. In Behar also the In- 
dependent Congress party, formed of a small number 
just on the eve of the elections, won a substantial 
success. And in the Punjab, the Congress party o 
Pt. Moti Lai Nehru was miserably defeated. The 
Punjab Congress President, Dr. Satya Pal, forfeited 
even his very security. L. Lajpat Rai defeated the 
Congress candidates in two constituencies at a time. 

Throughout the whole of Hindusthan, the Congress 
was defeated miserably at the polls. The late Pandit 
Motilal Nehru, was bold enough to have publicly 
admitted their defeat in these words, “We have not 
been defeated, rather we have been routed”. 

SWAM! SHRADDHANAND’S MARTYRDOM 

While the election storm had just subsided, 
preparations for another and the most stirring event 
of the time were going on in a hidden and nefari- 
ous comer of Delhi. This was the shocking and 
cowardly murder of Swami Shraddhanand which shook 
the whole country and the entire Hindu world from 
one end to the other. It was the last week of 



•63 


December 1926, when almost the whole of the Congress 
political India was busy preparing for the Gauhati 
Session. 

The Special Session of the Hindu Mahasabha also met 
at Gauhati for two days and was presided over by Pt- 
Malaviyaji. One of the most holy and respected Acharya 
of Assam, Shree Guruwar Goswami, joined the Session 
whole-heartedly and hence-forth took up the work of 
Hindu Sangathan in Assam in right earnest. Owing to 
the shocking news of the murder of Swami Shraddha- 
nand, a tragic gloom was overcast over the whole Con- 
ference and all the Hindus assembled there were deeply 
agitated. A large number of telegrams kept pouring 
in not only from different parts of India but even from 
outside the country — such as Natal and other places, 
asking the Mahasabha to issue an adequate appeal to the 
Hindu public for perpetuating Swamiji’s memory and 
mission. Some donations also were received from Natal. 

The Session appealed to the Hindus to bear up with 
this great loss ( the murder of Swamiji ) with perfect 
restraint and instead of exhibiting their grief through 
strong acts of various nature demonstrate it by raising 
a fitting memorial to Swamiji’s memory and mission 
and by carrying on his work with still, greater vigour. 

An appeal for raising an All India Swami Sliraddha- 
nand Memorial Fund of Rs. Ten Lacs was accordingly 
made by the Mahasabha* Money for the Shraddhanand 



64 


Memorial Fund voluntarily poured in from all sides* 
It would not be out of place to note that the Working 
Committee of the Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha in 
its sittings at Delhi : dated 25 & 26th January and 10th 
Feb. 1927, in accordance with the Gauhati resolution, 
was pleased to create and appoint a very strong and 
influential Trust to control, look after and manage the 
All India Shraddhanand Memorial Fund — Vide resolu- 
tions nos. 5 and 3, part 1st and 2nd respectively 
This Board of Trustees included some of the illustrious 
personalities of Hindusthan such as ; 


Pt. M. M. Malaviya 
L. La j pat Rai 
Raja Narendra Nath 
Seth Or, D. Birla 
Mahatma Hans Raj 
Syt. Bhai Parmanand 
Syt. N. C. Kelkar 


R. B. Ram Saran Das 
Syt. Raja Ram Pal SingK 
Syt. M. R. Jayakar 
Dr, B. S. Moonje 
Kr. Ganganand Singh 
Babu Padam Raj Jain 
Raja Govind Lai Pitti 


The list is very exhaustive and contains many 
other gentlemen of note representing various other 
Hindu sects. 


It is very interesting to mention that a large 
number of the Trustees are still in the Hindu Maha* 
sabha, guiding its affairs in one way or the other. 

We may take the liberty of the Hindu public to 
quote the f^BOlutioni verbatim to enlighten them 



BB 


more on the subject. The resolutions run thus : — 

No. 3 part (1) “The Working Committee of the 
Hinrlu Mahasabha has, after consulting many leading 
members of the Hindu Community, | appointed the 
following gentlemen as Trustees of the All India 
Shraddhanand Memorial Fund.” 

(Names as given above.. 35 in all. ) 

No. 3 Part (2) Para 2. “The Trustees shall select 
agencies of the Hindu Mahasabha, Sanatan Dharma 
Sabha and the Arya Samaj, including the Bhartiya 
Shuddhi Sabha and the Dalit Uddhar Sabha of Delhi, 
to carry out the objects of the Trust as they may 
consider fit from time to time, subject to such general 
conditions for the submission and audit of accounts as 
may be laid down, but the work of Sangathan shall be 
carried out through the Hindu Mahasabha alone.” 

It was further resolved in the next clause of the 
same resolution that out of the total funds of the Trust 
257o spent by the Mahasabha only on Hindu 

Sangathan, but it is a matter of great surprise that the 
Hindu Mahasabha has not availed of this oppor- 
tunity as yet. 

The Renaissance had dawned already. The work of 
the Renaissance was going on in right earnest. Event 
after event, and occurrence after occurrence, happening 
one after another during the |ast three year^ had added 



56 


greater and greater strength to it, carrying conviction 
deeper and deeper into hearts, yet unconvinced, and 
comers, yet nnawakened. But every great cause for its 
final conquest needs the blood of the the martyrs. And 
the martyrdom in the cause of the Great Renaissance 
at last came soon enough of no less holy and great a 
person than the Revered Swami Shraddhanand Iiim- 
self — a hero among men. 

On the evening after the murder, it was learnt that 
lights had been put as a mark of joy and jubilation at 
the Jumma Masjid of Agra. 

A very big defence fund contributed by thousands 
and thousands of Mussalmans was raised for the defence 
of Abdul .R^'Shid the murderer of Swamiji and for 
whom the best counsels were secured. How the murderer 
was, after having confessed his guilt, advised to feign 
madness, is a matter known to every body. Another 
great eye-opener was the incident which occurred on the 
day the murderer was hanged in Delhi when his corpse 
was taken in procession by no less than fifty thousand 
Musalmans of Delhi, — who brought about a riot and 
looted, plundered and killed some Hindus on the same 
day in the main streets of Delhi and buried him with 
full funeral obsequies and honours. Could there be a 
more occult demonstration not only of the full Muslim 
support and sympathy behind this murder of one of 
tha most loVed and respectable leaders of the &hdu8 



but of tlie full approach of it when the perpetrator of 
it — a wretched and a villain — was transformed into a 
Ghazi by them ? Still the Mussalmans feel that the 
Hindus should contribute to cherish brotherly feelings 
for them. 

Nor did Muslim fanaticism end liercv This shocking 
crime was only a part of a general plan laid out through- 
out the whole of the Muslim community, ' 

CONSEQUENCES OF MUSLIM BARBARITY 

More murders of Arya Samajists occuiTed at differ* 
ent places after short intervals, one of wliick took 
place at Pilibliit where a most piomineiit leader of the 
Hindus & of the local Arya Samaj, a respectable Zamin- 
dar, an Honorary Magistrate, and a Rai Bahadur — was 
shot down dead by a Mussalman while he was passing 
with a Hindu procession. 

Another murder of an Arya Samagist was effected 
by fanatic butchers in broad day light at a crowded 
Railway station, where amongst the passengers waiting 
for the tmin was this Arya Samagist Upadesak 
whom the butchers having recognised, chased, stabbed 
and killed him at the v<^y spot. 

Murders went on and amongst those was also the cold* 
blooded murder in the Railway compartment of Lala 
Nauak Ohand of Delhi, a staunch and bold Arya Samaj- 
ist, muck hated by Die Mussalmans of Delhi. Though 



58 


tlie culprit could not be traced yet it wEvS clear to all 
the Hindus of Dellii that it was the work of a Muslim. 

Soon came the next great event of the day, tlie 
notorious ‘Rangila Rasul Agitation’, which brought 
about riots, murders, evictions of Hindus from various 
parts of the Frontier Province, brow-beatings of 
Justices and everything in its train, compelling even the 
Government to bow before it. 

Mahashe Rajpal — the Publisher of ‘Rangila RasuP 
had been twice attacked. The 3rd attack, however, 
proved fatal and he was murdered by a fanatic Muslim 
in broad day light at his very shop in Lahore. 

These sad events had their natural consequences. 
Ghastly murders could not but rouse the slumbering 
Hindus to their duty. For some time the Hindu lion 
gave indications of some awakening but the repeated 
barbarity of the Muslim ‘goondas’, secretly at work, 
it had terrified a section of the Hindus, weakened their 
spirit and in fact had took away life out of them. The 
result was that they took shelter under the baneful 
propaganda of Hindu-Muslim unity, based on Satya and 
Ahinsa, but more on w^ooing the Muslims. This made 
the Hindus all the more cowards and of yielding nature 
and to our great sorrow we are still reaping the bitter 
fruit of this suicidal policy. 

As for the Hindu Mahasabha Movement and 
Renaissance, the masses were roused to their utmogt, 



59 


the climax had reached and its final victory was 
in sight 

For the leaders at the helms of affairs at the 
Mahasabha, no better opportunity could have pre- 
sented itself in the annals of the movement when 
a prompt, vigorous and more effective propagada 
on their part would have turned tbe tables and placed 
the country on the right track for all times to come. 
But they missed the golden chance and missed it 
never to get it back again, at least for a long time to 
come. They too could not remain uncontaminated 
either by the terrorism of the Muslim ‘goondas’ or their 
mistaken faith in the omniscience of the Congress. And 
even leaders of such calibre as Lala Lajpat Rai and 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya gradually faltered— un- 
fortunately for India — and a political dilemma of the 
first magnitude followed. But dark clouds have their 
silver linings and out of evil came out good. The 
Hindu Mahasabha, seemingly weakened, emerged 
out stronger in as much as it had to shift its heavy 
responsibility on the strong and broad shoulders of 
two of its well-tried and trusted generals — Dr, B, S. 
Moonje and Bhai Parmanand. 



BEGINNING OF THE FATEFUL PERIOD 


With the advetit of Dr. B. S. Moonje and Bhai 
Palmanand Hindu Mahasabha entered upon a fateful 
period of its life — a period of struggle^ opposition, 
isolation, self-determination and consolidation. 

In the years gone by, the Hindu Mahasabha, 
if not a corollary of Indian National Congress, at least 
felt shy of assuming the role of an All India Hindu 
Organisation, with strong, independent, bold and clear 
cut policy, taking up matters which concern the whole 
Indian Community and judging them primarily from 
the Hindu point of view. The leaders who were, 
guiding the destiny of the Mahasabha and steering its 
course were, at once, on one hand wedded to a policy 
of ‘united Nation’ based on fallacious premises and on 
the other hand at the same time sought to prevent fur- 
ther losses to the Hindu Community which it was Suffer- 
ing at the hands of the Muslims. They were, no doubt, 
serious and honest but simultaneously hesitant and 
vacillating in their policies. Socially they wanted to 
make the Hindu Community very strong and united 



61 


but politically they sought to keep the Mahasabha 
tied to the tail of the Congress. Very few people 
realised and understood the significance of the Hindu 
Sabha Movement of makins: Hindu Rashtra free from 
the yokes of foreign domination and of fortifying it- 
self at all points from attacks of the non-Hindus. It 
was only the Triumvirate (Dr. B. S. Moonje, Bhai 
Parmanand and Veer V. D. Savarkar), waiting for 
their turn, who could not allow the Hindus to lose their 
integrity even fn the name of Swarajya. 

In April, 1927, Dr. B. S. Moonje presided over the 
Patna Session of the Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha. 
Some were a bit frightened at Dr. Moonje’s election 
as the president. As he was regarded one of the 
strongest and most fiery advocates of the Hindu cause, 
it was feared he might give a bold set-back to the 
Congress movement. The wavering attitude of our 
leaders was clearly witnessed when, through this vague 
fear, he was prevailed upon by these prominent Hindu 
Sabha and Congress leaders not to read his address, 
which he had already written, to the audience, and satis- 
fying them simply with a verbal speech from the pulpit. 
Dr. Moonje, though often yielding to environments, 
has always remained loyal and true to the Hindu 
Sabha cause which he boldy espoused and has 
tenaciously stuck to it through sun and shade with a 
Hfedong service to his credit. 



62 


Before this ‘Mooiije- period’ in the History of Hindu 
Sabha Movement, the Hindu leaders and Hindu public 
had awakened, as we have already mentioned, to the 
great need of self-defence and self-preservation. But, 
unfortunately, the Hindu leaders could not take their 
stand for a long time. The^^ lost ground, obsessed 
by the sentimental ideal of the Congress that 
‘served as a film to obscure their vision from the 
right path.’ 

THE ALL PARTIES CONFERENCE 

In the all Parties Conference (1928) Report (chap. 1), 
we find how a strong current of consciousness among 
the Hindus at the cold murder of Swami Bhraddhanand 
in his sick bed, was given a turn, quite opposite, of find 
ing a formula for Hindu-Muslim unity by the Congress 
leaders. The Report says, “The Gauhati Session of 
the Congress met in December, 1926 in the shadow of 
a great tragedy and when differences and conflicts 
between Hindus and Muslims were at their height. 
The Congress passed a resolution calling upon the 
Working Committee to take immediate steps in 
consultation with Hindu and Mussalman leaders to 
devise measures for the removal of the ipresent deplo- 
rable differences between Hindus and Mussalmans and 
submit their report to the All India Congress Commit- 
tee not later than the blst March, 1927,” 



Now commenced, in compliance with these 
directions, a series of Unity Conferences to settle the 
Hindu-Moslem problem. It will be admitted that 
throughout thoso negotiations the Mohammedans have 
won the game at every point. Men lihe Lala Lajpat Rai 
and Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya, the acknowledged 
leaders of the Hindu Sabha Movement, came forward 
with the idealisUc proposal of Joint Electorates. But 
the Muslims were working all along according to a 
design and programme and they could not be reconcil- 
ed. Dr. B. S. Moonje as President of the Hindu 
Mahasabha had all along been putting up the Hindu 
Sabha point of view with all the boldness at his 
command. 

SIMON COMMISSION AND ITS BOYCOTT 

The result was that Hindu sentiments were being 
gradually brought forward and there was the possibility 
of a strong Hindu Mahasabha Movement throughout 
tlie country. But, unfortunatesy for the Hindus, the 
appearance of the Simon Commission with no Indian 
member on it, again placed the Hindu Sabha Movement 
in the back ground and the leaders of the Hindu Sabha 
joined hands with those of the Congress to oppose the 
working of the Simon Commission. There being a strong 
Hindu feeling amongst the Punjab Hindus, they, did 
alone co-operate with the Commission even in the 



64 


teeth of opposition to the move of the Hindu leaders 
in other provinces. 

This boycott not only resulted in giving a serious 
set-back to the Hindu Sabha Movement but also had 
bitter effects on the formation of the present Consti- 
tution with the so-called Communal Award which has 
reduced our ‘great ancient race to a position of abject 
slavery and impotency, Bhai Parmanandji, speaking 
on the present Constitution in the Central Legislative 
Assembly, closed his memorable speech (March, 19b3) 
with these pathetic words: — “Any kind of vindictive- 
ness on the part of an enlightened government towards 
the whole people would be unpardonable in the eyes 
of God and unjustifiable in the eyes of History.” 

During these days of the boycott of the Simon 
Commission, Lala Lajpat Rai — a great patriot and one 
of the pioneers of the Hindu Mabasabha Movement, 
passed away — a great loss to the Hindus in particular 
and to Hindusthan in general. 

The Hindu Maliasabha decided to raise a largo 
^fund’ to perpetuate the memory of Lalaji» An appeal 
was issued and in due course of time a sum of 
Rs. 60,000 was subscribed by the Hindu public 
through the untiring efforts of the Working Preside nt, 
Br. B* S. Moonje. 

After a short time the Report of the Sitoon Commis- 
sion was ouL The whole of Muslim India raised a 



65 


hue and cry as Sir John Simoiu the Chairman of th6 
Commission, though boycotted and was received with 
hlack flag deiiioiistrations throughout Hindusthan, did 
no injustice to the Hindus in general. The Report, 
therefore, was not received with any satisfaction either 
by the Moslems or by the Congress people for reasons 
of their own In the meantime, the Congress launch- 
ed their Civil Disobedience campaign. The British 
Statesmen were watchhig the trend of the movement 
with all the attention and without any authority Ithe 
Report and the Recommendations of the Simon Com- 
mission were abruptly set aside and in its place much 
importance was given to an informal body, like the 
Round Table Conference and its discussions. 

THE ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE AND THE 
ANGLO-MUSLIM ALLIANCE 

Dr. Moonje as the Working President of the Hindu 
Mahasabha was invited to the Round Table Conference. 
Besides him some of the prominent Hindus Were also 
invited in their private capacity. Among them the 
names of Raja Narendra Nath, Pandit Nanak Chand 
.and Mr. M. R, Jayakar may be mentioned. All of 
them tried their best to present the Hindu point of 
view before the British^statesmen and the delegates. 
The Congress owing to the Civil Disobedience 
Movement abstained from taking any part in the 



66 


deliberations of the Roand Table Conferejice. Bat, after 
the so-called truce between the Goverinneiit and the 
Congress, Mr. Gandhi went to London and instead 
of negotiating with the British Go\'ernment, he beg-an 
to follow the will-o’-the-wisp theory of Hindu-Moslem 
unity. Knowing full welLtli’^t his failure was a fore- 
gone conclusion the new Conservative Government of 
England struck bargain with the Moslem leaders and a 
friendly alliance was established between the two. This 
alliance was the inevitable outcome of Mr. GandhiV 
wrong attitude and mis-handling of the situation. As 
a result of this dhe Premier took it upon liimself 
to find out a fresh solution, of the. Communal problem 
and impose it upon India. This solution was anno- 
unced on August 17, 19B2, under ^he name of the 
Communal Award. It was supplemented by another 
announcement some time later and thus the Anglo- 
Muslim alliance was complete. 

THE SO-CALLED COMMUNAL AWARD 

This so-called, ‘Communal Award’, however, sealed 
the fate of the Hindus for ever. Writing on the 
Hindu-Muslim Communalism and . condemning both, 

Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru remarked .......“It is also 

true that the Communal Award is an utter negation 
of nationalism and is meant to divide Hindusthan 
into communal compartments and give strength to 



0is^‘'af)tivB lencieiicies and thus to strengthen the hold 
of BritiKh Imperialism*’'^ Bvon Dr. Ansari and Mr. 
Sh'erwani in a joint statement emphasised^ the main 
features of the Communal Award in the following 
Words ! — 

Perpetuating and stimulating the eause of divid- 
ing Indian^, accentuation and extension of communal 
divisions and creation of fresh communal groups and 
interests which would shatter all future prospects of 
eommunal co-operation*, these are the main features of 
the ^Communal Avard’.” Later on, Dr. Ansari even 
Went to the length of describing the Communal Award 
as a ‘cup of poisouh 

SUICIDAL POLICY OF THE CONGRESS 

In face ol all this, the Indian National Congress 
for fear of displeasing the Muslim cnnimuiiity adopted 
a suicidal attitude of neutrality, of neither rejecting 
nor accepting the Gonimunal Award, which along with 
the leaders of almost every community in India, it had 
emphatically condemned> 

Agitation against the Communal Award in India 
was started by Bhai Parmanand on behalf of the 
Hindu Mahasablia and afterwards taken up by Pandit 
Malaviya who created the Congress Nationalist Party 
within the Congress itself. The British Government 
after some-time invited prominent public men of India 



es 


to appear witnesses berfore the Joint Parllardei'Tltaty 
Select Committee, Dr, B, S. Moonje, Shri Bhai 
Parmananda, Syt. B< C. Cliatterji of Calcutta and R, B, 
Mehrchand of Peshawar were among those who 
appeared as witnesses and laid their objections against 
the Commnnal Award and the AVhite Paper 

THE MEMORABLE AMER SESSION AND AFTER 

Dr, B, S. Moonje was still in Fngland wdien the 
memorable session of the Akhil Bharatiya Hindu 
Mahaaabba was held at Ajmer on October lb, 1 fc and 15^ 
193B, under the presidentship of Bhai Parmanandji — 
a great statesman, practical politician and staunchest 
champion of the Hindu Cause, 

In his Presidential Address, he eimnciated his» 
views on the conditions through wliich the country 
was passing. At that time many puljlic men, like 
Pandit Jaw'ahar Lai Nehru and the Congress Ne\vs-* 
papers in th^ country' ran down his views on the ground 
that he preached co-operation with the Government as 
he advised the Hindus to capture the Legislatures. But 
only four months after this these same critics began to 
subscribe to his views and came to look upon the 
Council entry as the only political wmrk of any import- 
ance. And now what do we see ? The Congress Raj is 
prevalent in seven provinces of Hindusthun. Is it non- 
co-operation with the Government ? 



89 


Immerliaf'.ely after assuming the Presidentslilp oi 
the AVhil Bbarati}^ Hindu Mahasabha, Bhai Parma* 
nandji undertook an all India tour. He visited 
important towns in all the provinces of Hindnsthan, i. e. 
Agra and Oudh, Behar, Bengal, Bombay Presidency, 
Maharashtra, the N. W. F. Province and the Punjab. 
In Maharashtra Province, T)r. B* S. Moonje and Sjt. 
It. 0 , Bhidey also joined him. In almost all the 
chties, mass meetings of the Hindus were held and 
unanimous rn^solutions condemning the so-colled 
Communal Award were passed, texts of which were 
communicatefl to the Government and to the Joint 
1 ^ arl i a ni en t ary Com mitt ee . 

While concluding the Ajmer Session, it would be 
well to mention certain ontstanding events connected 
with Hindu Mahasabha's policy that was clearly 
marked in extending its sphere of influence and 
activity bejmnd the British India. 

The Hindn Mahasablia did not rest content by sending 
only a cable-gram to the League of Nations, communi- 
cating its resolutions and appealing to the League for in- 
terference and for application of the League Covenant to 
the Communal problems in India. But it stirred itself to 
make serious eiforts to end the long cultural isolation of 
the Hindus at home and of the Hindus in islands, coun- 
tries and other colonies outside India. The Hindu Maha- 
sabha, therefore, carefully looked to the grievances of 



70 


the Hindus Gk)a and made various attempts to get 
them removed. Taking advantage of Dr. Moonje’s stay 
in England after the evidence befote the Joint Parlia- 
mentary Select Committee in London , the Goanese 
Indians requested him to visit Lisbon, the capital of 
Portugal and to repressent their grievances to the 
Home Govtv of the Portuguese. 

CLOSER AFFINITY WITH THE BUDDHISTS 

In lui54, the 26tli Centenary of Lord Buddha ^vas 
celebrated in Japan. The Hindu M«hasabha received 
an invitation from the proper authorities and it 
managed to send their representatives to Japan to join 
and pay homage to Lord Buddh^^^s memoiy on behalf 
of the Hindus of India. 

The Hindu Mahasabha was emphatically of opinion 
that the time was ripe for the Hindus of Hindusthaii 
to brir>a about a closer affinity between them and their 
brethren, the Buddhists. Bhikshu Cttama, the we]] 
known Buddhist monk of Burma was therefore unaiiL 
mously elected as President of the 16th session of the 
Hindu Mahasabha held at Cawnpore in April, 1935. The 
acceptance of the presidentship of Hindu Mahasabha 
on the part of Bhikhshuji was hailed in all quarters 
in Hindusthan and the Buddhist countries like Japan 
and China particularly welcomed this new move of 
the Hindu Mahasabha* # 



71 


It is interesting to note the incident that took place* 
at the Jubbulpore Oonf^'ronce and to quote an ex-General’ 
Secretary of the Hindn Mahasabha the position is 
summarised thus:- 

“Therefore, when the next annual session of the 
Hindu Mahasabha met at Jubbulpore under the dis- 
tinguished presidentship of Sjt. N. C. Kelkar, the change 
was complete and even Pandit M^Iaviya was thrown 
overboard by the Hindu, representativas inspite of all 
their reverence for him on this question. For, when 
the Sindh question came up before the Mahasabha 
Pandit Malaviya again advi^^ed the Mahasabha not to 
take “odium” upon itself of making a settlement 
impossible by its flat denial but to wait for the report 
of the su,b-c.omn;iittee appointed by the Madras 
Congress,” 

But, the Sindh representatives headed by Dr^ . 
Choithram and Prof. Ghansham made a touching and . 
emphatic appeal to the gathering asking them not to . 
play the game of “Hide and Seek” but to reject, 
clearly and in plain terms a demand unreasonable on 
the face of it and accepted as such on all hands. 
Pandit Majaviya formally opposed it and was heard 
with the full respect due. to him. Dr. Moonje first 
wanted the representatives to bow to Panditji’s advice 
but when he found that they were unwilling he also 
respectfully opposed Panditji. Mr. Kelkar though 



72 


himself uncommitted also agreed with Dr. Moonje, 
Butj very few delegates voted with fhuidit Malaviya 
and all the rest voted for the rejection of the pro])Osed 
separation of Sindh. Thus the father ( of the Eeiiais- 
saiice ) saw at leasts that the child had oiitgrowi¥ 
the father. 


THE POONA SESSION 

Pandit M. M. Malaviya, one of the tmemier pioneers 
of the Renaissance, who since the Jubbnlporo Session 
(1^28) had ceased to take active interest in the affairs 
of Hindu Mahasabha, though he continued to remain 
as one of it'^ Vice-Presidents, pi’esided over the Poona 
Session held there on 29, dO and ^Lst December, 1935. 
In his presidential address he eulogised the services 
of Dr. Moonje and Bhai Parnianand and in the end 
announced that within 12 months he would collect a 
sum of Rs. one crore for the Hindu Mahasabha to 
carry on the work according to its own programme 
wliich he clearly and at great length exjdained to the 
huge audience. 

The two most important and contested resolutions, 
that were passed under the Presidentship of Panditji, 
concerned with the Removal of Untouchability and the 
Council entry programme of the Hindu Mahasabha. 
They may be quoted below verbatim : 

1. “TJb.« Hindu Maha Sabha furih«r affirms its 



73 


faitli tlmt untotlchability must not be regarded as a 
part of Hifldu religion or social system, 

‘‘Tlio Mahasabha reoommonds to tke Hindus the 
abolition of ail distinctions in the Hindu Society based 
on birth or caste in tke spkei^s of public, social and 
political life in which such distinctions ought to have no 
application and are out of place in the j^resent age,'’ 

2, ^^The Mahasabha is of opinion that elections to 
Legislatures should be contested with a view to pro» 
tecting and upholding the Hindu interest in the 
Legislatures and leave it to the Provincial Hindu 
Sabhas to take steps in tliat connection wherever 
necessary, 

About two nights were spent in discussing the 
resolution on Pntouchability, Mr, M, R, Jayakar, Pt, 
Malaviya and other very important personalities parti- 
cipated in the discussion. It was ultimately earned 
with an overwhelming majority. 

The decision regarding the Council entry was also a 
momentous one but when the time of election to the 
Provincial Legislatures came, a conflict arose between 
the IT. P. PiX)vuK5ial Hindu Sabha apd Pandit M, M> 
Malaviya, Although the ostensible cause of the differ- 
ence was the recognition of a particular Provincial Hindu 
JSabha when there came into existence two rival parties 
lit the United Province. Thi« rivalry between the parties 



74 


was of a few years' staixfing. The* Hindu Mahasabha 
at the Poona Session decided to conduct their election® 
and authorised B»bu Padam Eaj Jain to do the needful 
in this connection. At Agra the elections took ]>laco 
under tho supervision of Bhai ParmanaiKla and Babu 
Padam Raj Jain and the IT. P. Pro*vincial Hindu 
Sabha was properly recognised. Not satisfied with 
all this certain interested persons approached Pandit 
Malaviyaji for interference which resulted in some* 
conflict in the Working Committee of the Hindu 
Mahasabha and after a number of Working Committee 
meetings held at Delhi and Benares the problem was 
fi.nally solved at the Lahore Session of the Hindu 
Mahasabha when Malaviyaji chose to withdraw. 

The Lahore Session of the Hindu Mahasabha was 
presided over by His Holiness Jagatguru Shankara* 
charya< Dt. Kurtakoti. Dan Veer Seth Jugal Kishore 
Birla also attended the Session. 

Upto the Ahmedabad Session ( 1937 ), Bhai 
Parmanandfor all practical purposes was the Working 
President of the Mahasabha and guided its policy whh 
all the firmness and courage in him. During this period 
he made the Hindu Mahasabha a living organisation. 
The days of keeping the Mahasabha as a subsidiary 
or a corollary organisation to the Congress with half 
way policy were no longer to be continued and hence it 
was re-organised as quite independent of the Congress 



75 


witTi its own principles, and objects, policy and 
programme, 

OPENING OF THE NEW ERA 

For more than a decade Dr. B, S. Moonje arid 
Syt. Bhai Parmanand carried the torch of Renaissance 
and of true ideal of India’s freedom almost aingle 
handed. There were darkness and tempests all 
around. But the hands that held the torch never 
wavered. At last came the help, they had been so 
long looking for. That help was in the person of 
Swatantrya Veer Vinayak Damodar Savakar. This 
was the greatest satisfaction for these two fighters for 
and saviours of the Hindu Race and the future to-day 
is brightening up by the rising sun of Hindu Rashtra, 
With the advent of Sjt, Savarkar as president of the 
Hindu Mahasabha at Ahmedabad Session 1937 a new 
em opens for Hindusth^n and Hindudom. 

The presidential address of Veer Savarkar was 
very forceful and clear ! The principles and policy of 
the Hindu Mahasabha have «ieldom been explained 
with such clarity and conviction, as they have been done 
by Sjt. Savarkar. It was but expected of him. In 
this Conference the Hindu Sangathan Movement has 
been set in the context of a philosopoy which is at 
once irrefutable and deep. Sjt. Savarkar has proved 
beyond any shadow of doubt that the future of the 



76 


Hindns and the part they have to play in lifting this 
country out of the morass into which it has fallen, lies 
only along the lines he has suggested. Bhai Parma- 
nand exhorted the Hindus to read the address over 
and over again. According to him it should serve for 
them as Hheir National Bible’, as it comes from the 
forceful pen of a unique personality, pioneer of 
independence, possessed of infinite courage and wisdom. 
It is not surprising, therefore, to know that to meet 
the daily pressing demand from the Hindu Public and 
the local Sabhas, many thousand copies of Veer 
Savarkar’s Address had to be published in different 
languages of most of the Provinces of India. 

Prom the day he took the reins of the Hindu 
Mahasabha he has plunged himself, heart and soul 
into the working of the Hindu Mahasabha. * In such a 
short time he has been able to visit almost all the 
important places in U. P., the Punjab, Rajputana, 
Bombay, C. P. and Sindh. Everywhere he was wel- 
comed with unique and grand receptions. Unprece- 
dented audience listened to the message of the 
great patriot with rapt attention and pin-drop silence 
everywhere. 

Veer Savarkar with an unequalled record of service 
and sacrifice for the cause of our motherland has so 
impressed the people of Hindusthan at large with his 
vehement and forceful power of oratory that h© could 



77 


make them believe in the truth of his mission. 
Reaction against the Congress policy has also set in. 
Hindus have begun to realise their blunder in sacrific- 
ing their rights and interests at the altar of doubtful 
political expediency. It is hoped the Hindus would rise 
tQ the occasion and follow the great patriot who can 
alone save them from their national ruin and obtain 
for us true freedom in the right sense of the wnrcl. 

In conclusion it may be reminded that “Nations 
like organisms grow, decay and die. The laws of 
nature know no mercy. They work without any 
regard to or feeling for individuals or nations. No 
trace now is left of the Empires that were once so 
great, and which exerted such vast influence on the 
growth and development of mankind. There is, how- 
ever, one difference between an individual organism 
and a social organism. An individual organism decays 
and dies but social organisms in some cases are reborn 
and get a new lease of life. The recipe that w’orks 
successfully in bringing about the rebirth of a nation 
has been either a war or a revolution. For war we 
are not qualified. Social and political revolution is 
the only alternative that is left for us, and this w^e 
must take in hand, if we want to live and live with 
honour in our country and on this earth.’'* 




EXTRACTS FROM THE 

ADDRESSES 

OF OUR 

PRESIDENTS 



HON’BLE RAJA SIR RAMPAL SINGH 

K. C. J. E. ( OUDU ) 


DELHI, DECEMBER 1918, 


is difficult, rather impossible, for a person like 
myself to anticiptite the conclusions, which the Peace 
(.Conference will arrive at on the questions of inter- 
national adjustments that are to come before it, but one 
thing is clear and it is that step will be devised and 
taken for the practical realisation of those ideals and 
principles for which this war was fought at tremendous 
sacrifices and as far as it lies in hummi power founda- 
tion will be laid for lasting peace so as to make such 
wars remote if not impossible. The most important 
and momentous idea that has taken its birth from the 
bitter experience gained in this war is the idea of the 
formation of a League of Nations. The pre-emi- 
nently imperative need of such a, League cannot, be 
too highly commended and we hope and trust that it 
will emerge from the Conference the like of whi(*li 
huVnan history has never seen before and that Hindu s- 
than, the land of Hindus, shall have a place in it. 
Hindusthaii has been no silent partner in this struggle 



82 


for freedom and justice; her sacTilices have been great 
and commensurate with her capacity and resources; so 
I am confident when the affairs of the British Empire 
will be re-adjusted in the light of past experiences 
her position in the Empire will receive just and 
equitable consideration and she will be allowed to 
shape her own destiny according to her national 
requirements. It is not in any s])irit of asking re- 
compense for the services rendered by her that Hindus- 
than claims equal rights, equal privileges, and equal 
opportunities for her sot7s within the Ein])ire. They 
are her birth-rights; but even to hope for them a» 
reward is not beyond the frailty to which human 
nature is capable of. 

“There is one mattter more winch is of vital 
importance to us and deserves to be impressed upon 
the Peace Conference through the Representatives of 
the British and Indian Governments. I am sure you 
are not unaware of the fact that tlie invaluable trea- 
sures of intellectual productions of the Rishis of old 
were lost to us from time to time during the Mohame- 
dan rule. A large portion of the remnants though 
small yet j)riceless has been taken from this country 
by German travellers and now is in German libraries. 
As a pait of the war indemnity demanded from the 
Germans by conquering nations we Hindus demand 
the restoration of such manuscript books and writings 



PS 


in original to the custody of which we alone 
aie entitledv 

Reform Scheme promulgated hy His Excellency 
the Viceroy and the right Hon’ble The Secretary of 
State for India lias already received a full considera- 
tion in this country. It has been subjected to various 
forms of criticism from the standpoint of different 
shades of opinions. It is not for me to ^ into the 
details now. The message of 20th August 1917 
marks an era in the history of your political progress. 
The goal of the British rule in India has been defined 
in unequivocal manner and Self-Grovernment within the 
Empire is to be the aim and end of that rule; and it is 
to be attained by progressive stages of realisation. 
Opinions may differ as to the modes and manners in 
which this realisation is to be brought about but I 
believe there are not two opinions as to the liberality 
of the policy enunciated in the message. I strongly 
hold that the scheme is a distinct advance towards the 
progressive realisation of the Responsible Government 
and with certain modifications and amendments 
would personally accept it as framed by the illus- 
trious authors. 

‘^We meet this year under very peculiar circum- 
stances, On one side there are general rejoicings all 
the world over owing to the successful termination 
of the war and India has greater and special reasons 



84 


to share in them to her heart’s content but on th^? 
other side the high prices, famine, and the 
epidemic of Influenza have caused vide-spread dis- 
tress amongst the people and have cast a shadow 
over the country which cannot be too much deplored. 
We cannot but shed tears of sorrow on the lamentable 
toll claimed by the latter disease from amongst the 
high and low. It is a matter of great satisfaction 
that the All-Iiidia Hindu Maha Sablia lias not been 
unmindful of its duties towards our famine stricken 
bi'ethren of Garliwal. The Sabha is still in its infancy^ 
It is only five years ago tliat it was started and during 
this .short period of its existeiu^e it has gained strengtli 
and force as is evident from its manifold activities on 
the one hand and the confidence ajid reliance which the 
Hindu Community reposes in it by expecting and 
demanding from it to take the lead in all matters 
affecting its intei'ests at large on the otljer. The fa(d 
that the appeal of tlie Sabha to the Hiiidu public met 
with the ready and generous response is an index of 
the place it has now gained in the hearts of the 
people. In all matters whether political, social or 
others, affecting the welfare of the Hindu Community, 
it is to the All India Hindu Maha Sabha that we look 
to take a lead and I am glad the Sabha has not been 
behind as far as it lay in its power to j)ut forward the 
Hindu view of such matters. I congratulate the 



85 


Sabha on the success which has crowned its labour 
80 far. But as I pointed out in my Address at 
Lucknow, wo have to contend against many forces 
which at'o at work for our disruption and the task of 
promoting greater union and solidarity among all 
sections of the Hindu Community and uniting them 
more closely as pai'ts of organic whole which the 
Sabha has rightly placed in forefront of its objects 
is most stujjendous and needs co-operation of all well- 
wishers of the Community. From sometime past a 
movement towards nationalism has been gaining 
sti’eiigth in this country and the best and enlightened 
minds amongst our community have adopted the so- 
called non-sectarian attitude of being Indian first and 
Hindu, Mohammedan or anything eLe afterwards. 
No body can cavil at the high standard of patriotism 
that viberates through their hearts. But there is still 
a higher patriotism towards wlu>h humanity is now 
moving and it is nothing more, nothing less than 
what the Hindu RishivS of old, of revered memory 
preached and practised. 

am sure the Hindu Sabha never means to offend 
Qt encroach upon the legitimate rights of any commu- 
nity whether inhabiting India or elsewhere. Its objects 
should be in this respect only to defend and protect 
th^e just and equitable rights of the Hindus against 
the onslaughts of other peoples. If that is not so, the 



86 


wor(3 before the Sabha may better be expung* 

ed because by its long usage it connotes a community 
whose very religion is an embodiment of tolerance, 
^r'atholicity, and spiritualism as opposed to fanaticism, 
bigotry and materialism* I am afraid I will be taxing 
your patience too much if I speak on the present state 
of Hindu Community; suffice it to say that we have 
lost sight of the high ideals which used to pulsate and 
animate the hearts of our forefathers. The chief 
cause is that we are disorganised and disunited. It is 
for the Hindu Sabha to organise and unite the scattered 
attorns of our Community and to devise me«ns for the 
amelioration of the whole, so tlmt we might rise again 
to the same pinnacle of glory and civilisation whicli 
our forefathers had attained. Tlie majority of our 
Community reside in villages sunk in the lowest depths 
of misery and ignorance. There is absolutely no 
provision for the ministration of tlie spiritual and 
religious requirements of the people and the I'esult is 
that their religious ideas are fast drifting into some** 
thing vague and meaningless. 

**The less said about the depressed classes the 
better. It is for the Hindu Sabha to tak© hp all these 
matters in hand and to do all that is possible to save 
the Hindus as Hindu from extinction. Our system of 
charity haa degenerated and is producing a demorali- 
sing effect on a vast mass of population; our charitable 



87 


endowments are misused and are neither applied nor 
serve the purpose for wliich they were made; the 
majority of our temples and monastries are not now 
the places for the uplift of the spiritual side of our 
being, but contrary to that they often debase and 
produce a pernicious effect on the minds of the people; 
our Sadhus and sn-called Mahatmas have become 
mere mendicants, and instead of invigorating the moral 
side of human soul are pests to the country. Th.e 
study of our sacred and secular languages — I mean 
Sanskrit and Hindi — is being neglected and Dova 
Nagari Script has not yet been adopted by the country 
and in this way we are laying an axe at the very root 
of solidarity and cohesion which we so much aim at in 
our Community. Painful is the story to tell of the urn 
foi'tunate and unwholesome changes in most of the 
social, political and religious Hindu institutions that 
were meant for the uplift of the people but are now 
servuig the reverse purpose. I appeal to Hindu Sabha, 
I appeal to my Hindu brethren to take all these matters 
in hand and bring about such improvement in them as 
to make them worthy of the Hindu name. I desire to 
sound a warning. We are demanding self-determina- 
tion in all that concerns us politically, the same self- 
determination should be allowed to the people in social 
matters and if the Hindu Sabha will act otherwise it 
shall fail in its object I am sure. 



88 


‘‘As pi^esicleiit oi this Conference 1 would wauling 
in my duty if I d6 not refer to the communal repre- 
sentation which Minto-Morley Reform Scheme did 
introduce into this country some years ago; in pur- 
vsiianee of the same principle a settlement has been 
made and agreed upon between the Congress and 
Muslim League Lenders. It is a patent fact that 
Hindu mind got very much agitated not only by the 
innovation brought about hj the said scheme but also 
by the agreement mentioned above, and the Hindu 
Sahha is entitled to question the right and privilege 
of the Hindi! Congress I^eaders to come to such an 
agreement. No one can deny that it is wrong in 
principle and unjust in allowing excessive number of 
seats to our Muslim brethren and it is a matter of 
satisfaction that the eminent authors of the new 
scheme have not failed to notice the disadvantages 
that would result from it to the country. 

“Before closing my remarks on thic subject I would 
remind my Sikh bretliren wlio loo now demand a 
separate representation for themselves that they 
cannot politically gain more strength by following a 
policy of se]>aratism than by being witli the Comnm- 
nity which claims them to be its kith and kin. They 
should not forget that they are Hindus and will 
I’eiuaiu Hindus.” 



HIS HOLINESS JAGATGURU SHANKRACHARYA 

(l)lU KDKTAIvOTI), Nx\S1K* 


PRAY AG ( ALLAHABAD ), LEB. 1924. 


His Holiness Sliri Shankaracliarv’a dwelt at length 
on the calises that led to the downfall of Hindu 
Dll anna and on the means that can bring about the 
regeneration and the complete attainment of liberty in 
all that appertains to the social, political and religious 
life of the Hindus. In his speech His Holiness appro- 
priately remarked : — 

“An untoncliable, instead of being considered as 
something unhol^^ to look at, should be taken as an 
ideal person, an embodhneiit of seif-sacrifice^ and the 
moment we and look at him, thei'e must crop up in 
our mind the feelings of dw.p love^ legard and even 
veneration for hinu'^ 

He was emphatically of ojhnion, that “the ne^ci 
subject of gi^at importance is tlmt of ‘Conversion’’ and 
*Re-cou\wsion’. “The person who still doubts in 
the utility and efFrcacy of such a piTictieal pix>gramme"\ 
said he, “can be called uo less than an unfortu- 
nate fooL’^ 



90 


Coiitiuuiug his speech Sim Sliankaracliaryaji said 

“At that time (in Shivaji’s reign) the Brahmanas 
explored books on Hindu Law (Mitakshra) and boldly 
re-admitted i nto Hindu fold persons like Gangadhar 
Rangnath Kulkarni and others who had turned 
Muslims.” 

He concluded his s]>eech in these ])athctic 
words : — 

“If in these hard times, Hindus do not take serious- 
ly in hand this holy work of ‘Conversion’ and prevent 
their brethren from embracing alien faiths through 
mistaken views, I say here as I stand that within 
ten decades you shall find no Hindu on the surface of 
this earth.” 



SHRIYUT LALA LAJPAT RAI, LAHORE. 


CALCUTTA, APRIL 1925. 


‘‘I want to ompbasise on this occasion that our 
object is to further love and not hati'ed. The Hindus 
are religious people. Their scriptures, the Vedas, 
enjoin upon them to look at the whole universe with 
eyes of friendship. This, however, does not mean 
that we should be so sentiment-ridden as to make our- 
selves incapable of protecting our lives and rights and 

interests against unjust attacks by others AVe 

cannot afford to be so weak and imbecile as to allow or 
encourage others to crush us, nor can we be obsessed 
by false ideas of Ahimsa bnt at our peril. Ahimsa is 
the highest religion, but there is no religion higher 
than Truth. Ahimsa and Truth must be reconciled, 
in fact, in essence they are one and the same. But we 
cannot let others misunderstand us on this point; so 
that encouraged by our conduct in this respect they 
may take into their heads to interfere with our rights 
and to humiliate and destroy us. It may be possible 
for individuals, nay at some stage of their existence, it 
may be obligatory on them, to act up to the highest 



92 


ide«ls of Ahimsa. But, as a commumty, our Ahimsa 
must be regulated by Dharma as interpreted in the 
light of time and place. This is the teaching of the 
ancient Hindu religion. That is the principle upon 
which they founded the system of Varnas and 
Aslu'amas. What may be the highest religion for a 
Sauyasi, may be the greatest sin for a Grihasti. To 
confound the duties of the ditTerent Ashramas in such 
a way as to make them untimely and inopportune is 
making confusion worse confounded. It is a matter of 
extreme regret for us that we have let the true 
principles of Varna Ashrama Dharma disappear, and 
the whole system of Hindu life has been so perverted 
as to lead to confusion and degradation. Neither the 
Varnas, nor the Ashramas are to be found in their 
original condition or any way near them. Wliether 
we can re-establish them on the ancient principle is a 
question beyond my power to answer. But, I have no 
doubt, that to impose upon young Grihasties the whole 
Dharma of a Sanyasi, is entirely opposed to Hindu 
teachings and Hindu culture. There can only be one 
result of such a teaching, viz., destruction. 

am of opinion that we should make a supreme 
effort to introduce joy into the lives of our children 
and young men and young women. We should fill 
them with a hope and with a desire to rise in the world 
by their own exertions. What is needed is to make 



93 


them enterprising and ambitious. No nation can aspire 
to freedom and prosperity in life whose young men 
and young women are obsessed by the desire of being 
unworldly and ambitionless. This necessarily leads 
to laziness, false contentmeid, covvardiee and lack of 
spirit and also to unmanliness. This leads the people 
to taking things lying in and gradually becoming 
accustomed to slave mentality. A man who has no 
ambition to be free and prosperous and independent 
can never be happy, nor can he be a truly religious 
man. This is not the road to salvation but to 
destruction. 

“The Hindus have so far followed a Na^-ional policy 
and, I think, they must stick to that. They will be 
stultifying themselves if they replace their nationalism 
by communalism. Yet we cannot ignore the fact that 
there are some communities in India who want to take 
undue advantage of our nationalism and are pushing 
forward tbeir communalism to such an extent as is 
injurious to the interests of the whole nation and 
certainly disastrous to those of the Hindu Community. 
Such communalism we are bound to oppose as, 
in our judgment, it can only lead to permanent 
slavery, permanent disunity and a state of perpetual 
dependence. 

“The Hindu Mahasabha has no special political 
functions except to define the position of the Commu- 



94 


nity in relation to other communities. The Hindus as 
a community are opposed to communal representation 
as such in any shape or form. The preponderance of 
opinion seems to be that the Lucknow Pact Avas a 

mistake In the conversation at Delhi, the 

position of the Hindu representatives was that they 
would accept any uniform principle of representation 
applicable to the whole of India sui^ject to one consi- 
deration that the electorates in all cases should bo 
mixed, and that the principle of communal representa- 
tion shall not be extended beyond the legislature. In 
face of this, to say that the Hindus, as such, are oppo- 
sed to any compromise is not true. 1 do not consider 
that an understanding between the Hindus and the 
Mohammedans is impossible, but, it must be clearly 
understood, that the Hindus will not submit to any 
coerc^ion whatsoever in arriving at some settlement. 
No amount of riots and disturbances will make them 
enter into any agreement Avhich they do not consider 
fair and just. 

“We have several evidences of the mentality of 
the Frontier Mohammedans in this respect. Some 
Mohammedans have already suggested that all the 
territories which lie between Peshawar tod Agra 
should be made over to the Mohammedans in which 
they might establish Mohammedan Government as a 
member of the Mohammedan League of Nations. At 



95 


the last session of Muslim League held at Bombay, 
M. Mohammed Ali actually suggested that the 
Mohammedans of the Frontier Province should have 
the right of self-determination to choose between an 

affiliation with India or with Kabul The question 

of the Frontier is very important to the whole of 
India and it specially concerns the safety and security 
of the Hindu Community* It is not right to say that 
the territories beyond Indus were taken possession of 
by the British Government from the Mohammedans.** 
...The Sikhs held possession of these territories as a 
part of their Empire, and the British Government took 
possession of these provinces from the Siklis. So far 
as Hindus are concerned, the question is one of pure 
Frontier defence and should be judged purely on its 
merits as sucli. Tlie Hindus do not desire any domi- 
nation over the Mohammedan population. What they 
want is the safeguarding of their interests and that of 
India generally. 

“The Hindu Mahasabha and the Hindu Community 
as such must take steps to protect their Community 
from the attempts of other religions to take away their 
members. Just as their work is legitimate from their 
point of view, so must be the work of Hindu Communi- 
ty in that line. From the very nature of Hinduism, 
the Hindu work in that line is purely defensive. The 
Shuddhi movement is a defensive movement. 



^^Tlie Hindu Maliasablia stands for this unity of 
action and I appeal to all the different sections of the 
Hindu Community to lay aside their differences and 
unite under the flag of the Hindu Mahasabha* We 
must recognise the common dangers both internal and 
external. The external dangers 1 have already ref erred 
to. The internal dangers are still more formidable* 
We are too much disunited on account of the divisions 
and subdivisions of the Community into so many creeds 

and castes .The old game of throwing out people 

on very small pretences must be given up and occasions 
must be sought to bring people back into our fold 
without injuring anybody’s scruples.” 



SHRIYUT RAJA NARINDRA NATH, LAHORE. 


DELHI, AriHL 1926. 

aim i\t uatioiuilit'aiioii Ijiit assume forilie pre- 
seiit a. {‘oniiiiuiial attitude becaii.^e tliat attititde luis 
been forced iijjoii iks by circiunstauccs, 

'*< )ur political advaiiceiueiit will iniyjose u]) 0 ]i \is the 
duly <d se1f-d( 'fence and for the diseluiro-e of tliat duty 
all Hindus must Ijc equally eligible and shouhl be 
eq uull y jjre \ airiK 1 , 

“Tlu^ sanction given by Hindu society to \intouch- 
ability and to tlie treatment meted out to the depressed 
classes is a negation of democracy and of democratic 
])rincipl(*s, it is difficult to trace tlie historical (»rigiii 
of the attitude of the higher class Hindus, towards 
de])ressed cle sses. 

“It is very strange tliat one belonging to depressed 
classes has only to embrace Cliristiaaity or Islam and 
his untouchaliility in relation to Hindus disappears at 
once. A more illogical ])osition it is diificult to 
conceive. 

“ProselytLsm is not a modern conception in (ho 
land of Aryavaria. Buddliisin was the hrst reform 



movement amongst tlie Hindus. The religion which 
Buddha preached was for the whole of the human 
race. In the history of manlviiid Gautaui Buddha was 
the first to promulgate a religion within the folds of 
which every human being to wlucli-ever racf^ or country 
he belonged could come. Kabir and Guru Nanak 
followed him, preached in the same strain, and Guru 
Gobind Singh gave an organised shape to religion 
which has sprung from Hinduism and wliich ix based 
on the same cardinal ])rin(*i])les as Hinduism. Swaimi 
Dayanand Saraswati in recent times gave a strong 
impetus to the idea, though tlie external form which he 
gave to Hindu religion was different from that of Guru 
Gobind Singh. The idea of Shuddhi has tlnrefure no 
connection with recrmit political movements, and 1 do 
not why those wdio strive for political advaiicernent- 
should call upon us to give up a movement based on 
an idea first conceived in the Land of Aryavarta more 
than 25 centuries ago before Christianity or Islam 
came into existence and before any religious ])reacher 
in the World thought of laying open tlie path of Sal- 
vation to every human being who sought it. Shuddhi 
is nothing else but proselytism and it passes my 
comprehension why the right of (.‘onversiou eT>joyed 
by all other religious communities in the land should 
be denied to Hindus wdid in the History of the AVorld 
were the first to originate the idea. It is uniu cessary 



give fx comparative mimerical table of conversion^ 
1 would however lay stress on the fact that the idea 
of proselytism is pre-eminently our heritage* revived 
in different shapes by our religious reformers who 
appeared from time to time* It is very strange that 
the activities of the Rikhs whom I always designate as 
our first cousins is not ev^n mentioned in tlie speeches 
and addresses ilelivered by our critics fi'om various 
platforms. 

‘‘As far as tlie relations between Hindus and 
Sikhs are concterned. the ])rospe(‘ts are hopeful, as the 
only question on wliich a s])lit was possible has been 
settled in a manner satisfactory to the Sikhs. The 
Gurdwara Act has been passed, without m\y conflict 
lietween tire Sikhs and tlie Hindus in the Council. 
'Mutual controversy terminated at the stage of the 
Select Committee. I hope that Hindus and Sikhs will 
continue the spirit of mutual co-operatioiq and act in 
Unison. I wish 1 weic, in a ]X)sition to say the same 
tiling about Brahmans and non-Brahmans in Madras, 
perhaps those nearer that Presidency \\ull be able to 
eiiligliten us. 

“We Want adequate measures to be adopted for 
the protection of the interests of minorities, but we 
Want that such measures of protection should be 
Uniform for all minorities whether Hindu or Moham- 
medan. We do not wish to create deadlocks, nor do 



100 


we wish to convert tyrannj^ of majority info a tyranny 
of minority. AVe want no R})ecial measures of pro- 
tection for the* Hindu minority anywlicre wlucli do 
iK>t advocate for Muliammedans. On tln^ contrary oui’ 
grievance at present is that o;rcat(*r soli(*itude is shown 
for the protection of the inte.rests of the Muhauimedni! 
minority tlian for the protection of flie interests of 
Hindu luinority wherever it is fo(md to exist. 

‘^To sum up. rite ^‘raison d'etre’* of tlie Hindu orga- 
nisation is, that Hinr(u interests an’ nowlnre acUnpiately 
protected, that for the protection of them tlie tinit(‘d 
voice of 220 millions should he raised, that Hindu 
Community owinir t<^ its larg^e number, and to its dis- 
tribution over a very ]arg(‘ area lacks solidarity and 
union whicli rtiust he brouglit about and that its 
attitude towards certain low* classes is its own C'reation 
and a change in that attitude is ne(*essarv for wliich the 
Hindu (^)nnnunity inoi'ethan any other should s|)ecial- 
]y exuu’t. There are some social evils in Hindu €V)ni* 
munit}^ which a Hindu Organisation oidy can remove. 
The Mahasabha is as rnticli an advocate of free and 
democTatic institutions for tlie ctuintTy ami as eager 
to obtain Swaraj as any other bodjr. But it notic'es^ 
with regret that so far constitutions have been suggest- 
ed and framed mthout due regard to Hindu interests. 
We are told that political and civic interests of 
Hindus and Muhammedans are the same. It should 



101 


bo so, but- It Is not so in fact, owiii^; to dofc^ots in the 
('onstitution ? Muhntnmoclan intovosts an* l)Ging' 
treated as a vSO])arnte class by itself and this has forced 
upon us tlic. consideration of the Hindu interests 
as a se])arate class. We cannot refrain from devoting- 
serious thought to tile coiisideration f)f those interests 
simply lout of fear that sncli a coiirs(* vdll give rise 
to a (controversy and may delay our achiev ement of 
the goal of Swaraj. 

‘‘True Swaraj will he acdiieved only when justice 
is done to the legiiimatx^ claims of all communities. 

It always tak(‘s time for the ])rinciples of rectitude 

and justica^ to b(a*()me triumpliani /' 



SHRIYUT DR. B. S. MOONJE, NAGPUR* 


PATNA, APRIL 1927. 


“I shudder to think what shall happen to Ben^al^ 
Say 50 years hence, if this course of rapid decline of 
the Hindus of Bengal is not checked. 1 am afraid 
Bengal is fairly on the way to l)e(*ome another 
Kashmere of India in this respect. I feel from what 
I have seen abd read of the daily ha])penings in East 
Bengal particularly tliat Bengalees alone and unaided 
by Hindus outside Bengal are absolutely incapable 
of resisting the inroads of Islam into the preserves of 
Hinduism there. Let Bengal clearly understand that 
it may exercise some pressure on the (iovt. through 
the cult of the Bomb and the Pistol, but it will not 
be able to maintain the pressure until it develops the 
Latlii cult and proves it^capacity of putting down the 
mischievously aggressive mass Hooliganism. 

“Tlie Afghan, before he was allowed to be captured 
by and absorbed in Islam, was fighting for the preser* 
Vation and maintenance of Hindu religion and culture 
with the same tenacity and fearlessness of death as he 
was fighting for their destructioli only three or four 



103 


coiiiiiries later <jii, after Islam was forced on liim 
through sheer compulsion in a moment of helplessness 
of defeat snffereci in wars witli his Moslem invaders 
of Central Asia. But how did the Hindu India of the 
time re-a(*t to this forcible shearing of its most power- 
ful wings ? Does History record any evidence of any 
])ang felt in the then entirely Hindu Hindusthan, 
wl'.en such a big and enviable slice as Afghanistan was 
(nit out of it ? Did the Hindu Hindusthan of those 
days make any concerted move to avert the calamity 
tlnni ov(U’taking Afghanisthan ? As for Kashniere and 
Malabar. History t(dls the same sorry tale being 
repeated over there iiiucli in the same fashion as in 
Afghanistan. 

after tlie Moghul Empire was subv€u*ted and 
the Sikhs in the Punjab and the Marathas in the rest 
of Lidia had re-established the Hindu Emjiire, did the 
Hindus who were as paramount in India then as the 
Moslems were in their days before they had been 
conquered, move a finger to re(-oup the loss in theii 
number sustained through Moslem aggression ? Other 
parts of India also show marks of Moslem aggression 
narrating equally eloquent tales of Moslem efficiency 
and hunger of man powmr on one hand and of Hindu 
supineness and indifference on the other. 

“Thus every Moslem m«an or woman is a prosely- 
tising agent of Islam. The success so far gained by 



301 


them is a memorable moiiument to their faitli and 
teiiaeity of purpose as it is to our irreligion, indifFer- 
eucf' and inetticieii(*y. By their assiduous perseverance 
tliey have for themseKes, by now, built u]) out of the 
very Hindus a community of no less tlian 7 crores, 
that is, just one fourth of the entire Hindu population 
of India. The indifferejice and the present sociology 
and orthodoxy of the Hindus together with proverbial 
niild]iess and docility of temper, and thojr ijidulgeiu'c 
in sentimentalism of various kinds oT their own crear- 
ioiis — such as the (‘X(*esses of Ifliakii Sampradaya 
and of xUiimsa aial iion-violmice — have In^eii the chief 
contributors t(; their monumental suc(*ess of Islam in 
Ijidia< Their daily Avork of proselytisatioji and of 
building* up of tlicir community brick by brick, wa^^- so 
lung going* on so unmolested and without aiiy noise, 
that the hoi^e was manufa(*tiii*ed in them and tin^y had 
come to believe as a matter of course that a time will 
soon come when the 7 crores of tJie untouchables 
wbicii tlie Hindus regard as the refuse of iJieir com- 
munity shall have been devourinl, digested, and assi- 
milated in the Islamic society. They were thus 
building u]) castles in their mind that if tliey can 
once reach the Hindus at par by assimilation of tin? 
untouchables, their aggressiveness in which they feel 
supreme confidence will stand them in good stead to 
o-ive such a push to the mild Hindu as to send him 



105 


down lieadloiig along tlie inclined plane of extinction* 
Thus they were dreaming of absorbing the whole of 
Hindu India into themselves so that the whole of 
Hindusthan may ultimately belong to them and be 
changed into Muslimsthan as the whole of Afghanisthan 
now belongs to the Moslems. 

‘^Now let us further analyvse the Hindu mentality* 
It is hopelessly perlexing. The Hindu seems to be 
obsessed with the desire for Swaraj. It is a very noble 
and manly ambition, but has he ever indulged in a 
little iiitros])ection and examined Ids own inner self 
with a view to satisfy himself if lie is really tit for 
Swaraj ? In the quite lonliness of his room, when he 
is all to liimself alone, if he were to ask himself a 
question ‘’if I cannot guarantee safety and inimuiiity 
from molestation to my women folk and temples from 
those of my Moslem brethren wlio are only armed 
with LathiOvS, how can 1 aspire to wrest Swaraj from 
mid maintain it against the cupidity of those armed 
with machine guns,” what answer can lie give ? While 
trying to invent or discover an answer let him picture 
to himself in the loneliness of his room the daily 
occurrences of Hindoo’s running away for life when 
attacked by Moslem ruffians, leaving behind their wo- 
men-folk to be dealt with by them as they may please* 

Every Moslem^ man or woman is, as I have said 
above, a piosely Using agent of his religion and considers 



106 


it one of the sacred duties of his life as a Muslim to 
decay iu his or her life time a few Hindus, men or 
women, boys or girls, preferably the latter, and bring 
them into the Islamic fold. To the Muslim the whole 
world is his home and its things are meant to minister 
to his health and strength. Whatever he touches he 
purifies. The Hindu on the other hand is ever haunted 
with the fear of being polluted at every step. Here it 
may be the touch of one whom he is pleased to dub as 
untouchable: there perhaps tlie shadow of an outsider 
has fallen on his dishes; perhaps the >vater that he is 
drinking or the food he is eating has had a touch of a 
Shudra. He must take a Prayascluita, that is, undergo 
purification. 

‘•Communalism though inherently present more or 
less in any Credal Religion, has in the case of Islam 
in India been unfortunately fed and aggravated by 
the impolitic and uiistatesmanlike iitteninces of Jiiany 
of the Hindu Leaders of the Congress. 

“The Moslems fully utilized the Khtlafat move- 
ment for internal organisation of socio-religious 
character and the whole Moslem community of* India 
was taught to look beyond the frontiers of India for 
inspiration in Moslem Nationalism and for objects 
cbhimLahding their tf anscendantal Love and sacrifice. 
IMsl^ to'the revival of a surging wave of Pan- 
Mtoism inviolving in its vortex each and every 



107 


Moslem from the highest to the lowest rank of the 
society and conjuring up before them a vista of 
common brotlierhood of Islamic nations from Turkey 
in the West to East Bengal in the E^^st, including in 
it tlxe Moslem ised portions of India on its North 
Western Frontier such as Sind, Baluchistan, N. W. 
Frontier Province and tlie Punjab, under the hegemony 
of any one of the independent Islamic Nations deve- 
lopii^g the modern system of warfare of the West. 

^Wbiity based on the ])rinciple of bargaining can 
never be stable, ]rarticularly when it Jms to be purchas- 
ed by making concessions ...Tlie moment they 

say that Swaraj cannot be attained without Hindu- 
Moslem Unity, tliat unity becomes a marketable arti- 
(de and all the laws of economics (‘oncerning Demand 
and Supply immediately come into o])eration on it. 

‘T hav^e no value, not the least, for tlmt Swai*aj 
where tln^ Hindoo declines daily boch in numbers and 
in influence. I can only imagine that Swaraj where 
tile Hindu in his forefathers’ laud of Hindusthan shall 
be prospering and supreme, capable of radiating peace 
and love and brotherhood all round. How can he 
attain it, living as he does at thel present moment, 
under the dual domination of the British Machine-gun 
and the Moslem Lathi ? Shuddhi and Sangatlian are 
the m^ns prescribed by the Hindu Sabha Movement 
end boA reason and commonsense dictate that success 



108 


in this enterprise shall be the harbinger of stable and 
permanent Hindii-Moslem Unity and the Swaraj that 
shall be covetable. 

‘‘I feel that I ^should repeat my conviction that if 
the Hindus leave the Moslems severely alone for some 
time to come to do as they please even in association 
with the Government and cense talking any further of 
the Hindu Moslem Unity, i:h(^ Moslems th(unse]vos will 
see the folly of their own insistence on separatist com- 
munalism and may eventually come to feel that it 
shall be to their real interest as also to tliat of India as 
a whole if they veer round and merge tliemselv^ess in 
the Indian Nationalism for the common good of India 
which commotes their Communal prosperity also.*’ 



SHRIYUT N. C. KELKAR, POONA. 


JUBBULPORE, APRIL 1928, 

the Hindus, have a stake in the country, 
greater than any other community in India. In the 
recent troubles tlie Indian Mohammedans could at 
least tliink of sucli a thing as Hijrat, though of cour«e, 
they could not practise it successfully. But where in 
.the wliole wide world is there an inch of space which 
the poor, unbefriended and threatened Hindu can call 
his own, outside Hindusthan ? Other communities 
liave their whole bases of operations and world-wide 
lines of commnication, and flotillas of boats and trans- 
ports which ('an replenish tlmui iji India at need. The 
Hindu Society, on the other liand, lias long ago burnt 
its boats, cut olf every possible line of communicatio}! 
with the world with its own hands, and has cooped 
itself up unwisely with a ditch around itself and a 
foolish contrivance in which the valve shuts against 
itself but opens out for any hostile soldier, adventurer 
or camp-follower to safely come across and give the 
best account of the slightest capacity of mischief or 
harm which he maj^ possess. The only hope, therefore, 



no 


of this beleaguered community now lies in strongly 
fortifying itself at all points of attack, making friends 
with all amongst itself, taking good care of the blind, 
the lame and the diseased, and in enthusing the whole 
garrison with the hope that it can save itself even now, 
if it makes up its mind, the hope being reinforced by 
the warning that it is doomed to destruction if it faints 
or falters for a moment. Hindus not only wish to 
attain political Swaraj in India, but tliey also wish to 
have their proper share of it, remaining Hindus. 
Swaraj will not be wortli having if we cannot 
purchase it w*th any price les^ than tlie loss of 
Hinduism itself. 

“The removal of conflict between the different 
members and organs of the Hindu Societj" and tJie 
establishment of good understanding between them is 
only a foundation upon wliich the real structural work 
of strengthening and organisiing the Hindu so(uety is 
to be done. 

“(Jouferences are being held for the last three years 
to settle the points of differences between the Hindus 
and Mohammedans, in matters religious as well as 
political. But things went from bad to wox'se even 
after that. The attempt at the settlement of poMtioal 
differences has shared the same fate. The queitlon 
therefore arises, what next ? My reply to thet is 
‘wait and see’* But I do not give thftt reply in iiiy 



Ill 


cynical spirit. For I really tliink that the compromijsc 
proposals perhaps require some rest. It is now better 
to see the tree of communal good-will grow from a 
distance than pull it up frequently by its roots, as it 
were, to see how it is growing. The discussions and 
deliberatioiis held during the last throe or four years 
cajiHot all go for nothing. The discovery of the 
fundamental positions where botli Hindus and Maho- 
inedans stand is in itself a great gain. Digging up 
of foundations is a* necessary operation for Undertaking 
a structure, 

“The Hindus should, in my view, spend greater 
attention and energy on the consideration of the ques- 
tion as to how tliey will, so jar as they can, give the 
best account of themselves, in the work of achieving 
political Swarajya. 

“I can challenge any one to cite any well-known 
or proved instances of reconversions to Hinduism 
which were obtained by fraud or force, ever since the 
Shiiddhi and Sanghathan movements were ,set on foot. 
That being so, are Hindus to be branded as communal 
anti-national ? Is it a sin for them to wish to remain 
Hindus and participate in the future Swaraj as 
Hindus ^ It is well if the other communities co- 
operate with the Hindus in a fair spirit in the work 
of achieving Swarajya, But if they do not, that is 
well also, if xiot so well. The Hindu pilgrim’s never 



failing experience is that if he starts on the journey 
with a determination to complete his pilgrimage 
though all alone, he soon begins to get fellow pilgrims 
on the way as he proceeds. Companionship is indeed 
good, but self-reliance is always better.” 



SHRIYUT RAMANANDA CHATTERJI, CALCUTTA, 


vSllJAT, APiai. ] 92 ‘A 


111 lii.s jjresidt^iitial spof^ch tlie learned Editor of the 
Modern Review’' at the very outset refutes the charge 
of being coiumiuialists generally brought against the 
leaders of Hindu Mahasabha. He says, “Even tlie 
greatest of statesiue*!! in those countries (of Europe) 
may belong to «nialler grou])s and many have actually 
so belonged. No charge of communalism in a bad 
vSeiKse is brought against them. Similarly in Hindu- 
vsthaii, the charge of communalism (^annot justly be 
brought against B. Anand Mohan Bose, President of the 
Sadhara-n Brahmo Samaj and also of the Indian Nation-^ 
al Congress, against Eala Lajpat Rai, President of the 
Iliudii Mahasablni and also of the Indian National 
Congress or against Pt. Madan Molian Malaviya, Presi- 
dent of the Indian National Congress and also of the 
Hindu Mahasabha As for the Hindus of Hindusthan 
lie cleaidy explains their goal of life. “What I mean,” 
says he, “is that it is peculiarly our duty and our 
right to keep whatever of permanent value lias come 
down from our past and to extend the bounds of 



Ui 


Indian thought and culture. For whatever friend or 
foe maj say we are not a decadent people. We mean 
to live, we will live, we can live, and we will yet give 
to the world what God intended that we should/’ In 
the course of his speech he very lucidly sets forth the 
aims and objects of Hindu Mahasablia and brings lioiue 
to his audience the truth that Hindu Maliasabha stands 
for pure and untarnished nationalism. His words are 
worth quoting. ’‘The Hindu Mahasablia does not seek 
to have for Hindus any political, e^'onomic or civic 
rights or privileges to which they are not entitled by 
their numbers, educational and other qualifications, 
character, ability, public spirit and tax-paying capacity 
and, in particular the Hindu Mahasablia does not want 
for Hindus any fixed share for anything which may 
indirectly leave an unequitable portion for others. It 
stands for open and fair competition, for an open door, 
for talent irrespective of considerations of race, creed 
or complexion. It is one of its objects to ‘promote 
good feelings between the Hindus and other commu- 
nities in Hindusthan and to act in a friendly way with 
them with a view to evolve a united and self-governing 
Indian nation.” 

‘‘Perhaps what has more than anything else m«de 
the Hindu Mahasablia unpopular with the bulk of 
Indian Musalmans is its elfort ‘to preserve and increase 
the numerical strength of the Hindus’— which is one 



115 


of its declared objects, Non-Hindu communities in 
Hindusthan, like the Muslims and the Christians, parti- 
cularly the former, have increased vasty at the 
expense of the Hindus and the aborigines of Hindu- 
sthan. Therefore, anything dene to arrest this 
process cannot be looked upon with favour by the 
followers of those non-Indian faiths. Still more un- 
pleasant must the reversal of the process be to them. 
But I donot see how one can logically and justly object 
to the Hindus^ doing what the others have been doing 
for centuries — ])articularly as the Hindus have not 
gone ill for the accession to the ranks of ‘hice*’ Hindus, 
of non-Hindu women abducted or confiscated and oblig- 
ed to be converted, of men tempted to come over by the 
prospect of marriage, of ])ersons induced to be converted 
by the prospect of economic advantage, and of persons 
forced to be converted by terrorism of any kind. The 
Hindu Mahasahha and Hindu missions connected with 
it, formally or informally want reckon version and con- 
version only by fair, open and legitimate means.'’ 

^^Like the work of conversion and re-conversion, 
there are some other items in the programme of 
Hindu Sabha and missions Avliich have brought upon 
them the charge of communalism and made them un- 
popular with Christians and Muslim propagandists. 
One such item is the amelioration and improvement of 
the condition of the so-called low castes of the Hindu 



116 


community and of the aborigine^^ of Ilindusthaii. 
Jnei'edible as it may seem, even the efforts made by 
Hindus to get tlieir widows married are, for obvious 
reasons, disliked and opjx)sed by some Musalmans. 
Similarly, and also for obvious reasons, the eflorts to 
get abductors punished and abducted Hindu women 
rescued and given a respec-table ])ositio7i in Society 
are resented and misrepresented in some Mohamedan 
organs in Bengal/' He very strongly pleads the ('ause 
of the so-called ‘achhuts' and asks Hindu Mahasablia to 
take some aruion in the direction of providing educa- 
tional facilities both general and vocational for them to 
an adquate extent. On one occasion h(i vehementally 
saj's that ^*the sooner the expression ‘Depressed 
Classes' falls into disuse, the l>eticr.’' Another thing 
which he points out to be guarded against is the 
exaggeration of their number. ‘"It is generally thought 
and said by our critics tliat these peoph^ number six or 
more tlian six cTorcs. lint- it 1ms l)eeu recently 
admitted officially that the number is somewhere near 
three crores. Possibly it is still l(‘S 5 f;. 1 long for the 

day when we shall all be known cmly as Hindus, all in 
the enjoyment of equal social dignity.'’ Mr. Rama- 
nand Chatterjoe very painfully feels for the daily 
decrease in number of Hindus in every province. 
This leads him to eliscuss briefly the causes of the 
decay of nations and peoples. According to him this 



117 


decrease is due to tbeir losing hope and joy and rest 
in life on account of now conditions imposed on them 
from outside. He rightly points out that, ‘'If any 
Hindu caste or Hindus in any area are decreasing, it 
sliould be investigated wliether owing to any cause 
tluur play instinct has been su])pressed. collective 
enjoyment of life diminished and liope decreased.’^ 
In the end the learned President ex]dains the position 
of the Hindu Mahasabha avS regard its relation with 
other sist(‘r comin unities. '’1 sliall say only this in 
brief that, as in tln^ past, so at ])resent and also in the 
future tlH‘ Hindus will not shrink from facing all 
dangers and making all the sacu'iiices necessary for 
\vinni]ig freedom for all communities, “ 



SHRIYOT C. VIJIARAGHAVACHARIAR, MADRAS. 


AKOLA, AU(H".ST 19BL 


Passing very briefly ov^^r the origin anH progress 
of the Sabha he discusses the Tndia^' Problem cliiefly 
with reference to the solution of ttiiidu-Muslim unity. 
“The problem of minorities.’^ he says, “has assumed 
unique dominance in Indian politics. It is a remark- 
able fact that the Minority which is most immerous 
and which by wealth, education and above all organi- 
sation is most powerful is also the most insistent for 
numerous special safe-guards for the protection of its 
rights. It needs no great research for discovering the 
factors (other than those wdiich throughout the rest of 
the world constitute the pure Minority problem) 
which influence our Muslim fellow countrymen to 
conceive and formulate, as they have done, their 
special rights, real and subjective. I may be pardoned 
here for stating at once that our diflfxculty in solving 
this problem is due almost entirely to certain foreign 
and irtelevant elements that subjectively constitute 
this problem. The policy of conciliating the Muslims 



119 


by special patroiiagf^ and concessions began in this 
country between the seventies and eighties of the last 
century, almost simultaneously with the starting of 
Pan-Islamism by Abdul Hamid, Sultan of Turkey. 
And this problem has been ever since growing in 
volume and intensity, with the active encouragement of 
tlie Bureaucracy more than under tlie auspices of the 
(tovernment. The result is, it has become so complex, 
that it is impossible now for Muhamiiiadans themselves 
to arrive at a I'easoned and unanimous solution. 
Neither the tTOvernmeiit nor non-Muslims are able to 
arrive at a settlement with them. Prominent Muslims, 
such as Sir Mirza Ismail, the Dewan of Mysore, are 
clearly of opinion that no satisfactory solution would 
be reached in the near future. Therefore the one 
important question before us is, what is the remedy ? 
Are we to postpone the constitutional reforms and the 
political salvation of tlie country until \ve reach a 
solution of this problem so as to give satisfaction to 
everybody in the country ? It would be disastrous to 
adopt such an unreasonable attitude, look^ at it how 
you may. Rather the eflbrt must be to analyse and 
separate the purely local question of the adjustment of 
claims and interests from the national one of seeuring 
power into Indian hand. To my mind a solution of 
the minority problem is near at hand, the only solution 
we can think of. And that is to invoke the assistance 



120 


of the great International Institution, the League of 
Nations*” 

He an«!wers the objections and allays the fear of 
those who think that the solution of the problem of 
minority is purely a domej^tic matter and that tlicre- 
fore the Leaofue of Nations could not interfere. ‘‘This is 
a mistake*” He says, ‘‘No doubt it is true that neither 
the HinduvS nor the Muslims, noi'^ both of them 
together, can submit this question for arbitration to the 
League of Nations. But the (iovernment of British 
India, or better the Government of the coming Domi- 
nions, of its own motion can and onglit to do vso to 
save the situation.” 

Moreover, he believes that “when the new 
GoverJiment of British India is thus started on its ]eg'^, 
the Minority problem, or the Muslim problem to put it 
more accurately will cease to be a problem of domestic 
politics. We mav be sure that there will be no 
grievance. History shows that ancient Hindusthan 
was tlie safest place in the world to live in. Tlie 
freedom and security enjoyed throuofh the ages by the 
Jews of Cocliin, the Syrian Christians of Malabar and 
the Parsees of Oujrat and Bombay illustrate this fact. 
Nothing would prevail upon tliese commtinitios to 
return to Palestine, or Persia. So there is absolutely 
no need for our Muslim brethren and sisters to fear 
that their special rights would not be safe in our 



121 


country itself. However, if they have a grievance, 
there is the League of Nations ready to enquire and 
settle it impartially.” 

The learned President passed on to a consideration 
of the Constitutional question. He i» definitely against 
JFedei^alism. According to him “the sort of political 
mechanism invented at the Round Table Conference is 
Federalism only in name* Fantastic in structure and 
novel and startling in function, if at all it can be estab* 
lished, it would be dangerous for British India and 
ruinous for the Indian States.” 

He discusses the subject at length and in all impor- 
tant aspects of it. He is r»f the opinion* that “the 
Constitution should be unitary and parliamentary and 
not by ^uy means Federal in the sense proposed at the 
Round Table Conference. , Not only it is a physical 
and meta-physical impossibility, in the oft-quoted 
words of Carlyle, but it is in the highest degree 
dangerous to the people of both the Indias. I 
might here sound a note of waiiiing to our rulers. 
The well accepted international doctrine that a 
change in the form ot. Constitutional .Government 
of a country cannot absolve that country from all 
the legal obligations contracted by its unreformed 
ancestor, cannot in my humble view apply to a 
State constructed out of the political debris of 
British India on the one hand, and metamorphosed 



Indian States on the other. There should be no. Reser- 
vations and Crown subjects beyond the full reach of 
the new Government as regards Defence, Foreign Re- 
lations and Finance except in so far as the declarations 
of wars are concerned, and to which we should have the 
same right of voice as the Dominions. Compromises 
may be made by treaties between the reformed 
Government of British India, * and Britishers and 
Irishmen, residents in India whether as officials 
or non-officials, but who are not national, provided 
that the terms of such compromises do not constitute 
them a privileged class.” 



SHRIYUT N. C. KELKAR, POONA. 


DELHI, SEPTEMBER 1932. 


Shri N. C. Kelkar diseussM and dealt with the 
Communal Award of 17th August and observed, 
“My very first word of comment upon the 
Award would be that it is not the Awai'd of 
an arbitrator, but simply a decision by the British 
Government arrived at on its own responsibility like 
any other administrative decision. Individual 
members of the Bound Table Conference or its Consul- 
tative Committee, who were weak or incautious enough 
to accept Government, even in the last resort, as chosen 
judges or arbitrators, may naturally feel estopped from 
contesting the Award, But the Hindu Mahasabha as 
an association was not called upon to send anj^ chosen 
delegates to the Round Table Oonferent^. And the 
Sabha may legitimately feel itself not bound or estop- 
ped by the Cabinet decree of 17th August. No doubt the 
Round Table Conference gave the appearance of certain 
representatives of the Indian people being consulted, 
aad. allowed to suggest to Government decisions, 
which would be binding if they embodied a common 



124 


agreement among the leaders of different communities. 
But Government knew in their heart of hearts that no 
such agreement would be arrived at, and they also 
took pretty good care from time to time that such 
agreement would be made almost impossible. Openly 
as well as secretly they showed partiality to minorities, 
especially Muslims among them, and the minorities 
were consequently inspired or encouraged to set up a 
higher key to the tune of their communal demand. 
Government knew full well that they could make great 
capital out of the communal disagreement in Hindu- 
sthan, as communal leaders chosen for the purpose 
were bound to disagree, though invited to a R. T. 
Conference.*’ 

‘^If the Government of India,” he goes on, 
“honestly wanted to set up an Indian Nation on its 
feet in this country, they might have followed the 
example of League of Nations. But far from doing 
this, they have decided the matter in such a way that 
communal confusion in Hindusthan would be worse 
confounded, owing to communal distinctions being 
recognised in public and political affairs as much as in 
private life.” “The so-called Award can be im- 
peached,” according to him, “on many grotuads. The 
provisions in it liave conceded special electorates not 
only to Mahomedans, who demanded them, but also to 
Anglo-Indians, Indian Christians and even Indian 



125 


women who never aske^^ for them. .They went beyond 
even the Simon Commission whicli did not recommend 
an assured majority in the legislatures for the 
majority communities in the provinces, nor special 
electorates for Depress^ Classes or Indian Christians. 
Thf>y have also exceeded the demands put forward 
even by the official Government of the Punjab 
in the interest of the Muslims. For whereas an 
excess of two seats was suggested by them for 
Muslims over Hindus, a majority of nearly 10 has 
been conceded by the Award. If Government thought 
that minorities really should be given representation 
according to population basis, they should have done 
for the Hindu minorities in different provinces what 
they have done for Muslim minorities. But they 
have perpetrated injustice to the Hindu minorities 
alone both in Bengal and the Punjab. The Award 
thus cannot be justified on any common principle. 
But it is obviously the result of secret partiality to 
certain minority communities, and the desire also to 
cripple as far as possible the Hindu community which, 
in the opinion of Government, has been evincing 
perhaps an unpleasant or excessive political activity 
and national consciousness in this country. Broadly, 
the object of Government seems to be to make it 
impossible for the legislature in any province to effect- 
ively control the Executive Administration. Group 



126 


would be set up against group. Patronage would do 
its destructive work. And the foreigner would be 
able to manipulate the sea-saw of political power; so 
that the resulting profit of the position would always 
fall in his own lap.” 

He further tries to show very clearly how injustice 
has been done to the Hindus in each province, either 
by the grant of separate electorates or excessive 
weightage. He, then, refers to the vow which 
Mahatma Gandhi took to enter up on a fast unto 
death as a protest against separate electorates being 
given to the depressed classes. He very cnirtly reveals 
that “Truth in my humble opinion is that this 
method of self-immolation is not valid. It is grand 
but not politics.'’ As for the consequences which such 
a fast and its result are to bring about, he says, “For 
the Hindu Community generally it would be a painful 
humiliation. The Depressed class representatives, 
though they may for the moment yield to Gandhi will 
perpetually nurse that concession as a great grievance.” 

Relating to the History of negotiations, Mr. Kelkar 
observed that “it should be admitted that Mahomedans 
have won the game at every point; and also that the 
game would not be so won by them if the dice in the 
game were not loaded by Government favour and 
partiality. The whole history of negotiations in the 
Alh Parties Conferences at Delhi and Simla, and also at 



127 


the Round Table Conference in Loudon, is very Ins- 
tructive from this point of view*” 

Mr* Kelkar grows eloquent wheji, at the very face 
of communal selfishness, on the part of Muslims, he 
finds certain Hindu le^.ders’ futile optimism in the 
Hindu-Muslim Unity* His words are true even torday* 
We cannot withhold the temptation of quoting him 
in full “But assuming that the Award remains 
Unamended in maj^erial particulars, what shall we do 
with it ? A great Hindu leader actually suggested 
that we might again sit down, Hindus and Mahome* 
dans together, to negotiate a new settlement. I con- 
fess I never saw a more monumental example of futile 
optimism than is contained in this suggestion. Have 
we not been engaged in these negotiations ‘ad nauseum’ 
for years past ? And have we not realised to our cost 
that the Hindus have had to retire from every stage set 
up for a compromise, with the loss to them of one more 
point and the gain of one more point by the other party 
to the negotiations ? Not that the Hindu leaders 
lack the skill required for negotiation. But the other 
party regards every gestures for further negotiation 
as sure evid^^nce of the weakness of the Hindu com- 
munity, and at once pitches its demands to a higher 
key. This apparent weakness of the Hindus proceeds 
from no other real cause, however, than their inner 
urge to secure or wrest power from Government* 



And in Hiudu-Muslim co-operation, they fancy, they 
will get an unfailing weapon to wage the war with the 
Government to success, To a certain extent, this 
view is valid. But it can be easily pushed beyond 
reasonable limits. And this, in my opinimi, is being 
actually done for some time past. Tlie Indian Nation- 
al Congress has now found to its cost that the 
Hindiis have been exclusively shouldering the burden 
of political agitation to such an extent that the 
Congress is being dubbed by its opponents as ‘Hindu’ 
Congress. And into the bargain, the Congress has 
lost the co-operation of certain prominent Muslim 
leaders, which was an apjmeciable feature in the 
Congress-cum-Khilafat Movement of ten years ago. 
What a heart-rending tragedy must it have been for 
the Cangress leaders like Mahatma Gandhi and the late 
Pandit Motilal Nehru to find themselves denounced as 
enemies of Muslim as])irations, when their whole being 
was practically devoted to securing justice to them?” 



SHRIYUT BHAl PARMANANDA, LAHORE. 


A.TMKU, OCTOHKK’ ]9h:\. 


Bluu Parmanaiida traces, at the very outset, the 
history of the origin of the Indian National Congress 
and speaks of the Groverninent's policy of non-interfer- 
ence till 1905 when the partition of Bengal and the 
Russo-Japanese War gave rise to a new wave of patriot- 
ism. ‘‘In 190G,'’ he says, ‘‘two important events took 
place which indicate a change in the policy of the 
Government. One was the foundation of the Moslem 
League in Dacca with the object of (K)anter-ba1auciug the 
iuhunee of the Indian National Congress, and the other 
the waiting of a Muslem deputation, lieaded by H. H, 
the Agha Khan, on the Viceroy to put forth the chiim of 
separate representation in the Imperial Council for the 
Moslem comminiity. The latter event is generally 
described as a ‘Command performance,' The policy 
of the Government henceforth began to be marked by 
the grant of special favours to the Moslem community 
in all departments and this change led to the theory of 
‘a favourite wife,’ It is to the credit of the Punjab 
Hindus that they not only saw through this game but 



tried to find out ^suiiie way to iiif^et it. In 1 DuH for 
the fir.st time the Hindu Sablia Movement was started 
in the Punjab, and it is a iiotewortliy fac^t that aJl the 
leading Hindus, in spite of their different ways of 
thinking, joined this Movement.*' 

The Hindu Sabha Movement, however, received a 
(dieck by the repressive policy of tlie Punjab Govern- 
ment and filial]}^ it received a deatli blow by the 
Congresss-League Pact of Liu'know in 1910. In 19'20, 
the Nomco-operatioit and the Khilafat movement held 
the field. The Mohamedan community tliought that 
destruction of the Galiphate meant the destruction of 
Islam and that for this the Britisli Govt, were res- 
ponsible. Muslims made a (*ommon (^ause with tlie 
Congress. ‘Glut this period, however, was followed 
by a sudden outbreak of Hindu-Moslem riots through- 
out the country. The Mohammedan Press and the 
Mullahs raised the old ciy of ‘Islam in danger!’ and 
proclaimed that the ])laying of music before the 
mosques by the Hindus in their religious processions 
was destructive of Islam and that the Mohammedans 
should resist it at any cost. This sudden aggressiveness 
on the part of the Muslims attended by occasional 
murders of Hindu leaders again awakened in the 
Hindus a spontaneous feeling of the great need of 
self-defence and self-preservation. The growth of 
this feeling once more turned the Hindu mind aw^ay 



131 


from the Co]i;^Tess and-^ave rise to the Hindu Sanga- 
than Movement. 1 believe most firmly tliat if the 
Hindu leaders had ^one on with this new Movement, 
they would certainly have saved the nation from 
many a ])itfall and danger, and that if the Hindu 
Sablia met witli another failure, it was undoubtedly due 
to the desertion <»f its own leaders/' 

Bhaiji deals with the appointment of the Simon 
(/oniinission, liow it was oppos(‘d ly th(‘ Hindu leaders 
ahui^ with t]n)s(^ of the Coui^ress and liOw Lonl Rirken- 
liead suggested, in the form of a (dialieni^e, that tlie 
Indians could not ]n'o<lucea niianiinoUvS constitution for 
the coujitry. Tin* Nehru li(^])ort was the r(\sult of it and 
it offered nu outline for a cojistitutiou wliich was signed 
by the Muslim members as well who, however, soon with- 
drew their sigiiatures and the much desired unity never 
materialized, ‘dn tlie course of llrst Hound Table Con- 
ference^ the communal prejbhun was<mc(* more jiresejited 
in its most acute form as a. I>art<^ furtJn'r constitutional 
progr(‘ss. This was again ajmther trap. The Simon 
Commission had (les^TilH‘d tJie (*ommunal problem as 
the most importaait and highly controversial one. At 
the same time supposijig it to be incapable af sulutiim 
by mutual agreement of the two communities they 
had laid down their solution for it, I think, in such a 
case, the question should not have been raised at all, 
at the Round Table Conference and even when it was 



132 


raised and no agreement was reached, the Commission’s 
unanimous recommendation on that point was already 
there which, considering the statutory position and 
the importance of the investigation of the Commission 
should have been the last thing to be ignored. Again, 
when after the so-called truce between the Government 
and Mahatma Gandhi, Mahatma Gandhi went to 
Jx)ndon nnd instead of negotiating with the Britisli 
Government, he began to follow the will-o‘-the wisp 
theory of Hindn-Moslem unity. Kno\ving full well 
that his failure was a fore-gone (conclusion the new 
Conservative Government of England settled with the 
Moslem leaders and a friendly alliance was established 
between them. This alliance was the inevitable out- 
come of Mahatma Gandhi's wrong attitude and 
handling. As a result of this the Premier took it upon 
himself to find out a fresli solution of the communal 
problem and impose it upon India. This solution 
was announced on August 17, 1932, under the name 
of the Communal Award.” 

Bhaiji discusses the Communal Award in every 
respect and in very strong terms condemns it. 
According to him, ^‘There is an open alliance bet- 
ween the British Govt, and Moslems.” Hindu- 
Muslim unity is impossible at present as he observes, 
“In my view we have reached a stage where the 
Congress with its theory of Swaraj through Hindu 



133 


Moslem unity and Oivdl disobedience goes entirely out 
of the field.” As to what should be the future line of 
action for the Hindus, he says, “Looking at the condi- 
tion of the Hindus in the various provinces, each 
having its eyes turned in a different direction I cannot 
but add that the future is very gloomy and dark for 
the Hindus. I do not use these words by way of any 
discouragement but witli the clear object of pointing 
out that if the Hindus have a will to live in this country 
as a living rac« they shall have to make gigantic 
efforts, much more gigantic than they have hitherto 

made If a few denationalised Hindu politicians 

have quietly acquiesced in the Communal Award for 
the sake of temporary peace or concord, they do not 
represent the feelings, thoughts and aspirations of the 
millions of unsophisticated Hindus who cherish in their 
minds the glorious traditions of their ancient culture 
and history. 1 feel an impulse in me that the Hindus 
would willingly co-operate with Great Britain if their 
status and responsible position as the premier commu- 
nity in India is recognized in the political institutions 
of new India. But they would never consent to play 
second fiddle to the Moslems under the British flag in 
Provincial and Central Legislatures. I utter this note 
of warning here and now that if the Hindus are ex- 
posed to dishonour, humiliation and injustice under 
the British rule, it would be no use blaming them if 



134 


in despair tliey return to such wild agitation as might 
even aim at the disruption of the Empire. 

“This constitution is going to create a state within 
a state where the outer state would remain permanently 
in a weak condition, while the inner state, being more 
solid and united on the basis of religious bond, w'ould 
tend to grow stronger and stronger every day. The 
strangest thing of all. however, with us is that the 
Congress, supposed to be the most ini])ortant ])olitical 
organisation in the country has been committed to a 
policy that makes it altogether unfit to op))ose the 
proposed constitution on c<mimunal grounds. The 
Congress leaders having proclaimed themselves non- 
communal do feel shy of o])posing this constitution for 
fear of being censured as communalists by their Mo<='- 
lein friends. The most important ])olitical organisa- 
tion in the country is thus quite lielpless to o])pose 
this constitution although it is no less certain that it 
involves a question of life and death for the Hindus 
in India,’’ 

“The communal constitution,” he remarks, ‘‘has 
made such a change in our jxditics that for the 
Hindus no alternative (’jourse is left but to seek the 
shelter of the Hindu Mahasahha and work out their 
salvation through Hindu Sangathau. I confess the 
Hindu Mahasabha is not yet a fully developed organi- 
sation but the fault does not lie in the natizre of the 



orcyaiiisatioii. Tlie Mahasablia is so be('ause the Hindus 
as a community lack that national consciousness 
which must be there to make it a living and strong 
organisation. Our first task, therefore, is to create that 
consciousness and, more parti (ml arly, to direct our 
energy to the task of creating tlmt consciousness in 
])rovinces where it is wholly lacking. I think tlie 
most important weapon which could be of service to 
us in this work is tlie capturing of the Legislative 
Assembly and Cmincils. The Hindu Sabhas at various 
headquarters in provim^es should see that only those 
candidates are returned to re])resent the Hindus wlio 
are pledged to fight the communal constitution. This 
ought to he tlie first item of our programme and it 
should receive our immediate attention. 

*^Wlien a nation, in the process of natural decay, 
loses its vitality, it becomes the duty of tJiose who 
have some life left in them to give it for the good of 
the nation and infuse a new life into it. This is the 
only efficfurions treatment for old and decaying races, 
Love of life and comfort which is a significant s^unp- 
tom of the decay of a race, produces cowardice and 
cowardi(^e is death. It is sacrifice of life and devo- 
tion to the cause of a nation which pi’oduces courage 
and courage is new life. In our traditions we read 
that when the country was being over-run by barbari- 
ans, a great ‘yajna’ was performed on the top of 



1B6 


Mount Abu. Out of that ‘yajiia’ wore (U‘eated the 
Agnikula Rajputs who pledged to give their lives for 
defence of 'Dliarma.’ We have similar and important 
incidents in the history of Sikh Gurus in tlie Punjab. 
When the Brahmins from K«shiiiir, on being perse- 
cuted and tortured by their foreign rulers, came to 
Amritsar and in an open ‘durbar* of Guru Teg Baha- 
dur prayed that tliey be saved from their oppressors, 
the Guru told them in reply that there was only one 
way to save them : a man of great piety should lay 
down his life in the name of ‘Dharma’. Guru Teg 
Bahadur kept his word. His head was taken off by 
orders of the Moghul King in the Chandni Chowk of 
Delhi. Out of this martyrdom was kindled a fire that 
infused a new life into the Hindus of the Punjab. 
For seven hundred years a great river of invasions 
had been flowing from the North-West of India. The 
Hindus had lost all power of resistance and the flow 
of invasions went on. But all of a sudden, not only 
the flow of that river was stopped but its direction 
was turned the other way. This was the great and 
unequalled miracle in the history of India. The very 
people who had been victims of invasions for seven 
centuries became invaders and the old invader® bad 
now to defend their hearths and homes from invasions. 
How was this miracle brought about ? This miracle 
was the direct outcome of the principle of martyrdom 



preached by Guru Gobind Singh. The remedy is 
there. It is for the Hindu youths to come in the field 
and practise it for themselves. Those who cannot 
afford to give their lives for the noblest cause of 
preserving their great and ancient race have got other 
modes to take part in that great ‘yajna’. The rich 
can give tlieir riches, the learned their knowledge and 
tlie strong their strength. I liave a plan in my mind 
to establish at Ifellii a home for such workers who 
would devote tln^ir lives to this noble cause- It is yet 
a plan. It can materialise by offerings of life and 
wealth from some of the people who have got a 
feeling heart.” 



SHRIYUT BHIKSHU UTTAMA, BURMA. 


CAWNPORE, APRIL 1935. 


The President was highly pleased and expressed 
his thankfulness to the Hindus for appreciating his 
services rendered fcr the uplift of Burmese and 
propagation of Boddha Dharma in Burma. He said, 
‘•I have not done any remarkable service to Hindu 
Mahasabha and yet you have given me such a high 
honour. All this indicate that you all consider one crore 
Boddha Burmese as your brethren, you love them 
and take them as part and parcel of the great Hindu 
Society and whatever service I have done to them, you 
all highly appreciate and hold me in great estimation.” 
He further in his speech elucidated the fact that after 
a careful study of the Boddha and Hindu religions he 
was emphatically of opinion that ‘‘Bhagwan Buddha 
was one of the staunch Hindus that ever lived. 
Buddha never gave up the Hindu Dharma; on the con- 
trary he gave to it a new colour and new life and 
extended it beyond the bounds of Hindusthan.” The 
great Bhikshu in his resentment at the policy of 
British Govt, to separate Burma from the rest of 



139 


Hindusthan says, ‘1 consider it ( the separation of 
Burma from Hindusthan ) sacriligious and take it 
no less tlian cutting the Aryan culture and Aryan race 
to pieces.” He thanked the Hindu Mahasabha for 
its taking the wise step in sending their repre* 
sentatives to Japan to attend the ‘2.oth Centenary 
of Lord Buddha to pay homage to His Blessed 
memory on belialf of the Hindus of Hindusthan. He 
criticised the policy of the Indian National Congress 
in as much as tfie latter is vociferous in calling Hindu 
Mahasabha as a ('ommunal body. In the end he 
exhorted the Hindus to be more kind and considerate 
towards their brethren of depressed classes, to amelio- 
rate their condition, to make changes in their social 
and religious practices and thus to consolidate their 
own ground internally. 

He at great length deploiTid the pro-Muslim and 
anti-national policy of the Indian National Congress 
and refuted all allegations that Hindu Mahasabha is 
a communal organixation. 



SHRIYUT PT. MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA, BENARAS. 


POONA, DECEMBER lOBO. 


Tracing his coimef'tioii Avith the Hindu Mahasabha 
since its very inception in 1916, Panditji eulogised 
the services of Dr. Moonje, Bhai Barm an an da and 
Lala Lajpat Rai. He then briefly described the 
activities of the Hindu Mahasalflia in general and 
those of Hindu leaders in particular for obtaining 
Swarajya. “But,” he deplored, “instead of Swarajya 
an ‘Anti-Indian’ Constitution ( Communal Award ) was 
thrust upon the peo])le of Hindusthan.” He says fur- 
ther, “This is the state of things after 50 years’ struggle, 
etforts and sacrifices; our future seems to be dark; all 
cry for Swarajya but an ‘Award’ is given which is anti- 
Hindu, What is this Communal Award ? This is 
nothing but the reducing of Hindus who make 7b% of 
the population to a position of non-entity and in- 
, significance, I do not have any grudge for Muslims 
but what has been awarded is unbearable for me.” 
Panditji condemned separate electorates, and communal 
riots and exhorted Hindus and Muslims to be considerate 
and thoughtful. He asked the Hindus to give up 



141 


pessimism and liopelessness and believe in tlie well- 
known wmrds of Tilak ; ‘SAvaraj is our birth-rigiit and I 
shall have it.’ He then appreciated the activities and 
work, done by Dr. Moonje in founding a military 
college which in Panditji’s opinion was a dire neces- 
sity for the Hindus. Panditji h\ the end dealt with 
the problems of cow-protection, commercial and indus- 
trial enterprises and gave many practical suggestions to 
carry out the schemes for them to a success. He 
alluded to the question of the uplift of tlie depressed 
classes and asked the Hindus to be more careful in 
this respect, to ameliorate their condition and never to 
look them down as our Shastras enjoin us to do. 

In the end Panditji announced that within 12 
months he would collect a sum of Rs. One Crore for 
the Hindu Mahasabha to carry on the work according 
to its own programme which he clearly aiid at great 
length explained to the huge audience. 



HIS HOLINESS SHRI SHANKARACHARYA, 

( Dk. KurTKOTI ), NAftffv* 


LAHORE, OCTOBER 19B(;. 


‘^And freedom is only possible if the alien Faiths 
that have separate independent nations and spheres of 
activity of their own for the development of thoir own 
cukures are made to live here peacefully and on 
friendly terms with the Hindus. They must be made 
to understand that Hindiisthaii is primarily for the 
Hindus and that the Hindus live for the jireserva.tion 
and development of the Aryan culture and tlie Hindu 
Dharma which are bound to prove beneficial to all 
humanity. 

‘‘I affirm that in Hindusthan the national race, 
religion and language ought to be that of the Hindus. 
With this as the basic principle of our national consti- 
tution joint electorates without any reservation of 
seats for particular groups or communities offer the 
right solution of the problem of minority representa- 
tion. It will be in conformity witli the highest ideals 
of democracy and also in keeping with the principles of 
equality and other tenets for which Hinduism stands* 



But if any guarantee or safeguard for the protection of 
any minorities is needed, the Minority Guarantee 
Treaties of the League of Nations provide it most 
effectively. 

‘‘For while the Communal Decision delivers an 
attack from the outside, there are many fissiparous and 
cantankerous agencies within the stxucture of the 
Hindu society itself which gnaw at its “vitals from 
within. There are many evil practices and institutions 
among the Hindus that have crept in now and then 
since the Hindus forgot the progressive principles of 
their ancestors, wliich all conspire to make the Hindus 
a weak and disjointed community. More than the 
Communal Decision it is these that menace Hinduism 
and the Hindus, That menace must be combatted. It 
is only when these evil agencies are buried low down 
never to rise again that the Hindus shall emerge into 
a strong, united and militant race and then alone will 
the Hindus be the worthy bearers of the torch of 
Hindu culture and Hindu Dharma. 

“The Hindu Mahasabha which is the only premier 
representative institution of the Hindus ought to 
organize itself in such a manner as to be able to achieve 
all these objectives. There should be a strong elected 
representative executive at the centre of this body 
which can sketch the plan of action and work it out. 
Fresh blood should be infused in it by changing some 



144 


members of that executive body by rotation but con- 
sistency of policy should be maintained by retaining a 
few members in office for some more years. 

^^The culture of a nation is vitally CQimected with its 
lauguage. The stamp of a foreign culture on a nation 
can be detected from the impress of a foreign language 
on the mother-tongue. Every independent nation 
guards and preserves its national language for this 
reason. Hindusthan, therefore, should insist on making 
EUndi the lingua-indica of the country. We should 
realise the fact that every foreign word admitted into 
our language spells the death of the original Hindi 
synonym of it. Such indiscreet incorporation doCvS not 
enrich the language but on the contrary it weakens it. 
We should emj)hasise the purity of the Hindi language 
just as we insist on the purity of the Hindu culture. 

’‘Under the circumstances tJie Hindu Mahasabha 
ought to have its own i*epresentatives in the legislatures 
to guard the interests and promote the xdglits of the 
Hindus. The Mahasabha, therefore, should fight the 
elections on its own ticket but that light should be on 
the clear issue of the protection of Hindu interests. 

“Hinduism has kept alive the torch of the ancient 
Aryan culture and civilization. To preserve that 
culture, it is our duty to preserve Hinduism itself, not 
as a mummified specimen in a museum of antiquities, 
but as a living growth that has come dowfi to us from 



the ages, most vital and tenacious and most deserving 
of fostering care and protection among all the religions 
of the world, as it is also the most ancient among the 
living religions of the world. I would have our critics 
remember that after all Hindusthan is the land of the 
Hindus and the Plindus have no other habitat elsewhere. 
In consequence, whatever the faults and the extra- 
vagence, of us Hindus in the land of Hindustlian may 
be, they have a certain right to expect indulgence hi 
their own land from fellow-citizens who or whose 
ancestors have witliin liistorical memory ceased to 
be Hindus. 

‘‘The Hindu Mahasabha should be considered as the 
representative body not only of tlie Hindus by birth or 
the Hindus in Hindusthan, but also as representative of 
the Hindus abroad and particularly of those who by 
voluntary choice have enlisted theinselves as Hindus 
and whom we should consider as Hindus by adoption. 
Were we to act otherwise, we should be casting a slur 
upon the labours of men like Swami Vivekanaiida and 
others who have carried the torch of Hindu religion 
and philosophy in Europe and America, This will in- 
volve a revision of the constitution of tlie Mahasabha 
wide enough to give representation to all Hindus fi’om 
tli^ fai^-flting corners of the world and strong enough 
to catry on the day-to-day programme of work without 
any hitoh or interruption,” 



SYT. VEER V. D. SAVARKAR, BOMBAY. 


AHMEDABAD, DKCEMBER J937. 


“As the whole superstructure of the aiissiou aiitl the 
function of the Hindu Mahasabha. rest on the correct 
definition of the word ‘Hindu’, we must first of all make 
it clear what ‘Hindutva’ really means. 

II ii 

" B t fssftfawtt: II ^ II 

“ ‘Every one who regards and claims this Bharai- 
bhoomi from the Indus to the Seas as his Fatherland 
and Holyland is a Hindu.’ Hero I jnust ]joint out 
that it is rather loose to say that any jjerson profes.s- 
ing any religion of Indian origin is a Hindu. Because 
that is only one aspect of Hindutva. The second and 
equally essential constituent of the concept of Hindutva 
cannot be ignored if we want to save the definition 
from getting overlapping and unreal. It is not 
enough that a person should profess any religion of 
Indian origin, i. e. recognise Hindusthan as a®*!*!;, his 
Holyjand, but mu.st also recognise it as his fqg»j; <;oo, 
his Father-lapd as well Hindudom is bound 



and marked out as n ])eo])]e and a by tliem- 

selves not by only the tie of a common liolyland in 
whicli tina'r reli^^ion took Vnrth but by the ties of a 
common (*n]tnre, a common lan^nan-e, a common his- 
tory and essentially of a common fatherland as \velL 
It is these two (‘onstifiients taken tf)o-ether that consti- 
tute onr Hindiitya and distine^nisli ns from any otlior 
|)er>|)le ill the AVorld. 

‘'The word iHindu' is not a denomination which the 
foreigners ajiplied to ns in (*ontoni])t or otlierwise but 
is derived from <)nr \hTidic njipellatioii of PRfn'j 
(Saptiisinfl hu ) aiid is boric* <nn, by the name of one of 
our procima^s and jieoplcs borderine* on the Indus wlio 
are Imin^ cal]<‘(} (iowti to tlii> day as and 

‘^Tlie Mahasabha is not in the main a Hindii-Dharma 
Sabha but it is pre-eminently a Hiiidu-Rashtra'-Sabha 
and is a Ikxn-liindu organization shaping the destiny 
of the Hindu Nation in all its social, political and 
cultural aspects. 

‘’A ])eople is marked out as a nation by tkeniselves 
not so much by the absence of any heterogeneous 
differences amongst themselves as by the fact of their 
differing from other peoples more markedly than the\" 
differ amongst themselves. Even those who deny 
the fact that tlie Hindus could be called a nation by 
themselves, do recognise Grreat Britain, the United 
States, Russia, Germany and other peoples as nations. 



148 


(Hindus) possess a common Holylniid, The 
Ve^dic Ilishis are tlieir common pride, th(‘ir Gramo^ari- 
ans Painini and Patanjali, their poets Bliavabhooti and 
Kalidas, their Jier^es Shree Ihama and Shree Krishna — 
Sbivaji and Pratap — Garn Govind and Banda are a 
sour('e of common inspiration. Their Prophets Buddha 
and Mahaveer, Kanad and Shankar, are held in 
common esteem/ F/ike their aiK-ient and sacred laiig- 
tiage, the Sanskrit, their scripts also are fashioimd ou 
the same basis and the Kagari s(Ti])t has been the 
common vehicle of their sacr<*d writings since centuries 
in the past. Their ancient and modern History is« 
common. They have friends and enemies in common. 
They lia'^'e faced contmon dangers and -won victories 
in common. One in natitjnal glory and one iti national 
disasters, one in national despairs and one in national 
ho]>e the Hindus arc weldefl together fluring neons of 
a common life and a cfunmon liabitat. Above all tlie 
Hindus are bound together by the dearest, most sacred 
and most enduring bounds of a cmiimoii Fatherland 
and a eonnnon Holyland, and these two being identi- 
fied with one and the same country, our Bharat-bliumi — 
our India, the National ttnencss and homogenity of the 
Hindus have been doubly sure. If the United States 
with the warring cTowds of Negroes, Germans and 
Anglo Saxons, with a com mom past not exceeding 
four or five centuries put together, can be called a 



nation — ^Jieu tVie Hindus must be entitled to bo 
recogiiij^ed as a nation par exeel lenee. Vcuily the 
Hindus as a people differ most niarkeflly from any 
other people in the world than they differ amongst 
themselves. All tests whatsoever of a common country, 
rac?e, religion, language that go to entitle a people to 
form a nation, entitle the Hindus with greater em- 
phasis to that claim. And whatever differences divide 
the Hindus amongvSt themselves are rapidl}^ disappear- 
ing owing to the re-awakening of the national 
consciousness and the Sangathan and the socdal reform 
n>ovenients of to-day. 

‘’Idierefore the Hindu Mahasabha tliat lias, as for- 
mulated in its current constitution, set before itself the 
task of ‘the maintenance, protection and promotion 
of the Hindu race, culture and civilization for the ad- 
vancement and glory of Hindu Rashtra* is pre-emi- 
nently a natianal body representing the Hindu Nation 
as a whole. 

“Are not they themselves who swear by the name 
of Indian Nationalism, in season and out of season, 
liable to the same charge of parochialuess ? If the 
Maliasabha represents the Hindu Nation only,, they 
claim to represent the Indian Nation alone. But is 
not the concept of an Indian Nation itself a parochial 
conception in relation to human State ? In fact the 
earth is oiir Motherland and Humanity onr Nation. 



150 


Nay aiid Vedaiitist ^’oes further and elainis tliis Universe 
for Jiis country and all manifestations from the stars to 
the stone his own self. i ^ ^ n’ 

says Tukaram ! Why tlien tako the Flitrah^yas to cut 
ns off from the rest of mankind, deem ourselves as a 
vseparate Nation as Indians and lio'ht with every otlier 
country and the Ihmlisli in i)arti(*u]ars who after all 
are our brothers-in-llumanity ! not sar-rifice 

Indian interests to those of tlie British Eni])ir(* which 
is a ]aro;er politi(‘a.] syntliesivS ? Tln‘ fact is that all 
Patriotism is more or less parocliial and communal and 
is res}jonsib]e for dreadful waj-s throuj^fiout In i man 
history, T)\us the Indiaji Patriots who in.stead of 
starting and joining some movement of a universal 
state, stop sliort cd' it, join an Ijidian Movement and 
ve^t continue to mock at the Hindu Sangathan as 

‘ -:V ^ 

narrow and communal and j)aro<fdal suc(*eed oidy in 
mocking at themselves. 

the national representative body of Hindudom 
the Hindu Mahasabha aims at the all round regeneration 
of the Hiiidii people. But the absolute political 
independence of Hindustlian is a sine qua non for that 
all round regeneration of Hindudom. The fortunes of 
the Hindus are more in-extricably and more closely 
bound up with India than that of any other non- Hindu 
sections of our country-men. After all the Hindus are 
the bedrock on whicli an Indian independent state' 



151 


could be built. W'liatev er may luippeju some centuries 
hence, the solid tact of to-day caniif^t be ignored that 
religion weilds a mighty influence on the minds of 
men in lliudustlian and in the case of Maliominedans 
especially their religious zeal more often tliaii not 
bordei's on fanaticism! Their love towards Tiidia as 
their Motherland is but a handmaifi to their love for 
their Holyland outside India. Their faces arc ever 
turned towards Mecca and Madina. But to the Hindus 
flindusthan being their Fatlierland as well as their' 
Holyland, the love they bear to Hiiidustlian is undivi- 
ded and absolute. Tliey not only form the overwhelm- 
ing majority of Indian population but have on the 
whole been the trusted champions of her cause. A 
Malioiiimedau is often found to cherish an extra- 
territorial allegiance, is moved more by events in 
Palestine iliaii what concerns India as a Nation, 
worries himself more «bout the well being of the Arabs 
than the well being of his neighbours and countaymen 

in India* A Hindu patriot worth the name cannot 

but be an Indiaji patriot as well, in iliis sense the 
consolidation and the independence of Hindu Nation 
is but another name for the independence of the 
Indian Nation as a whole. 

“India is dear to us because it has been and is the 
home of our Hindu Race, the land which has been the 
cx'adle of our prophets and heroes and gods and god- 



152 


meiu Otherwise land for land there may be many a 
country as rich in gold and silver on the face of the 
earth. River for river the Missicipi is nearly as good 
as the Ganges and its waters are not altogether bitter. 
The stones and trees and greens in Hindiisthan are 
just as good or bad stones and trees and greens of their 
respective species else-where. Hindusthali is a Father- 
land and Holyland to us not because it is a land in 
the world but because it is associated with our 
tiistory; it has been the home of our forefathers, where- 
in our mothers gave us the first suckle at their breast 
and our fathers cradled us on their knees from gene- 
ration to generation. 

‘^The real meaning of Swarajya then, is not merely 
the geographical independence of the bit of earth 
called India. To the Hindus independence of Hindu- 
sthan can only be worth having if that ensures their 
Hindutva — their religious, racial and cultural indenti- 
ty. We are not out to fight and die for a ^Swarajya’ 
which could only be had at the cost of our ‘Swatva’, 
our Hindutva itself 

“Let the Indian State be purely Indian. Let it not 
recognise any invidious distinctions whatsoever as re- 
gards the franchise, public services, offices, taxation on 
the grounds of religion and race. Let no cognizance 
be taken whatsoever of man’s being Hindu or Mahom- 
medan, Christian or Jew. Let all citizens of that 



Indian state be treated according to their individual 
worth irrespective of their religious or racial percen- 
tage in the general population. Let that language 
and script be the national language and script of that 
Indian state which are understood by the overwhelm- 
ing majority of the people as happens in every other 
state in the world, i. e. in England or the United 
States in America and let no religious basis be allow- 
ed to tamper with that language and script with an 
enforced and perverse hybridism whatsoever. Let 
‘one man one vote’ be the general rule irrespective of 
caste or creed, race or religion. If such an Indian 
State is kept in view the Hindu Sangathanists in the 
interest of the Hindu Sangathan itself will be the first 
to offer tlieir wholehearted loyalty to it. I for one and 
thousands of the Mahasabhaites like me have set this 
ideal of an Indian State as our political goal ever 
since the beginning of our political career and shall 
continue to work for its consummation to the end of 
our life. Can any attitude towiods an Indian State 
be more national than that ? 

“Justice demands that I must plainly proclaim 

that the mission and policy of the Hindu Mahasabha 
# 

with regard to an Indian State have been more 
national than the present day policy of tlie Indian 
National Congress itself. 

“Fortunately for the Hindus Mr. Jinnali an<l ilm 



Moslem Leaguers have deliberately disclosed their 

real intentions I thank them for it. An open 

enemy is safer than a suspicious friend in dealing 

with him They want the unalloyed Urdu to be 

raised to the position of the national tongue of the 

Indian State The Moslems will not tolerate the 

‘Vande Mataram’ song. The poor unity-hankers 
amongst the Hindus hastened to cut it short. 

“When will our unity-hankers understand that the 
real question at the root of this Moslem displeasure is 
not a word here or a song there. We would have 
sacrificed a dozen songs or a hundred words of our 
own free will if thereby we could really contribute to 
the unity and solidarity of Hindusthan. But we know 
the question is not so simple as that. It is the strife 
of different cultures and races and nations and these 
trifles are but the passing and outward symptoms of 
this malady deep seated in the Moslem mind. They 
want to brand the forehead of Hindudom and other 
non-Moslem sections in Hindusthan with a stamp of 
self-humiliation and Moslem domination and we 
Hindus are not going to tolerate it any longer not only 
in the interests of Hindudom alone but even in the 
interest of Indian nation as well. 

“The Moslems in Bengal as everywhere did not claim 
a special representation or weightage in sufferings and 
sacrifice The Hon’ble Mr. Fazlul Huq threatenMhe 



very ftludus ia Bengal who struggled most and suffered 
most, to whose sufferings alone Mr. Huq owes his 
*gaddi’ that he will ‘satao^ ( ) them, in all shades of 
the meaning of that word from teasing to oppressing ! 
I should like to assure the Honoii liable Mr. Fazlul Huq 
that the Bengal Hindus are a hard nut to crackv 
They have at times forced some of the prancing Pro- 
consuls of even the powerful British Empire like Lord 
Cnrzon to climb down ! But if he ever does persecute 
our Bengal Hinifus then let him not forget that we 
Hindus also can iti Maharastra and elsewhere deal out 
to his comrades the same treatment, measure for 
measure, full to the brim and well shaken ! 

need not refer to the attitude of the Moslems as 
regards the ('’ommunal Award and the Federatian in 
which case also the}^ want to humiliate the Hindus 
and Shy-loek-like insist on having their pound 
of flesh ! 

''Hands"off, sir, liands off ! If you aim thus to 
reduce the Hindus to the position of helots in their 
own land you should do well to remember that the suc- 
cession of Aurangzebs when they weilded an Imperial 
power here had failed to perform that feat and in their 
attempt to carry out that design only succeded in 
digging their own grave ! Surely, Jinnahs and 
Huqs cannot accomplish what Aurangzebs failed 
to acJiiieve ! 



tlifi Hindus remember that the real cause of 
this mischief is imtliing else but the hankering of the 
Hindus after the Will-o’-the-\Visp of a Hindti-Moslem 
unity. The day we gave tlie Slaliommedans to under- 
stand that Swarajya could not be won unless and until 
the Mahomraedaiis obliged the Hindus by making a 
common cause with tliem that day wo rendered au 

honourable unity impossible.... The only threat that 

Mahommedainsf always hold before the Hindus is to the 
effect that they would not join the Hindus in tlu^ 
struggle for Indian Freedom unless their anti-national 
and fanatical demands are granted on the spot. Let 
the Hindus silence the threat once for all tolling pouft 
blank ‘fideiiffs ! we wanted and do want only that 
kind of unity which will go to create an Tiiflian State 
in which all citizens iiTospective of caste or creed, 
race or religion are treatefi alike on the principle 

of ojie man one vote We are out to win Swarajya 

in which our along with the of all other 

e^i'ijstituents will be safe. We are not out to fight 
with England only to find a ehange of masters but we 
Hindus aim to be masters in our own house. A 
B\^wajya that could only be had at the humiliation 
and cost of Hindiitva itself is for its Hindus as good 
, as suicide. If India is not freed froth foreign domina- 
tion the Indian Moslems cannot but he t^l^ves them- 
selves. If they feel it to be true, if and when they 



feel they cannot do without the assistance and the 
good will of the Hindus let them come theii to ask for 
unity and that also not to oblige the Hindus but to 
oblige themselves. A Hindu-Moslem unity which is 
effected thus is worth having. The Hindus have 
realized to their cost that in this case seeking unity is 
losing it. Hencefoith the Hindu formula for Hindu- 
Moslem unity is only this — ‘If you come, with you: 
if you don’t without you; and if you oppose, inspite of 
you — the Hindus will continue to fight for their 
National Freedom as best as they can !’ 

“1 exhort you all to assert yourselves as Hindus! 
Down with apologetic attitude that makes some of us 
feel shy to proclaim themselves as Hindus, as if it 
was something uniiatioiial, something like a disgrace 
to be born of the line of Shree Rama and Shree 
Krishna — Shivaji and Pratap and Clovindsingh I We 
Hindus must have a country of our own in the 
Solar System and must continue there as Hindus— 
descendants of a mighty people. Then itp with the 
Shuddhi which has not a religious meaning alone but 
a political side as well ! Up with Sangathan for the 
consummation of which it is simply imperative for 
us Hindus to capture whatever political power has 
been wrung out by efforts in the past tinder the pre- 
sent Reforms Act. You must henceforth vote for 

those who are not ashamed themselves of being Hindujs, 



openly stand for the Hindus and pledge themselvf^S 
not to keep burning insense, always at the cost of the 
Hindus before the fetish of a dishonourable unity cult. 

This alone will save not only the Hindu Nation 

of ours but even the Indian State to come. For truly 
Hindus are and cannot but be the main stay of our 
Indian State ! We shall ever guarantee protection 
to the religion, culture and language of the minorities 
for themselves, but we shall no longer tolerate any 
aggression on their part on the equal liberty of the 
Hindus to guard their religion, culture and language 
as well. If the non-Hindu minorities are to be pro- 
tected then surely the Hindu majority also must be 
protected against any aggressive minority in India ! 

“I assure you, Oh Hindus, that if but you lose no 
self-confidence in yourselves and are up and doing in 
time, all that is lost may yet be regained. There is 
some such virility and staying power inherent in your 
race as find a few parallels in the annals of the 
world. Let alone the Daityas and Asuras you van- 
quished in your mythological and the prehistorical 
period of your annals — but your very history dates 
from some two thousand years B. C. 1 Amdist the 
terrible struggle for existence which is incessantly 
going on in creation, survival of the fittest is the rule. 
The nations or the mighty Inkas and Pharaphs and 
Nebnchadne^ers were swept away and no trace left 



beh.in(1. But you survived those national cataclysms 
because you were found the fittest to survive. There 
are ups and downs in the life of every nation. This 
very England which rules today over an Empire had 
often fallen an easy prey to the Romans and the Danes, 
the Dutch and the Normans as well. We too had to 
face great national disasters. But each time we rose 
and tided them over. The Greeks under Alexander, 
the Great, came conquering the world but they could 
not conquer Hindusthan. Chandragupta rose and we 
drove the Greeks back inflicting crushing defeats on 
them military and cultural. Three centuries after the 
Huns came on us like an avalanche. All Europe and 
half Asia lay at their feet, they smashed the Roman 
Empire to pieces. But after some two centuries of a 
life and death struggle against them we vanquished 
them in the end under our Vikramaditya, the Great. 
The Shakas also fared no better. The mighty hands 
of Shalivahan and Yashodharman beat them a chip. 
Where are those of our enemies — the Huns and the 
Parthian s and the Shakas — ^today? Their very names 
are forgotten ! Gone, effaced from the face of India 
and the world as well. The virility and the staying 
out power of our race triumphed over them all. 

‘‘Then centuries after Mahommedans invaded India 
and carried everything before them. Their kingdo^is 
and Empires seemed to reign supreme. But we rallied 



again and ever since the day that Shivajee was born 
the God of War sided with us. Battle after battle we 
beat the Mosleme in a hundred field; their Kingdoms 
and Empires, their Nawabs and Shahas and Badshahas 
were brought to their knees by our warriors till at last 
Bhausaheb, the Commander-in-Chief of the Hindus, 
as if symbolically raised his Hammer and literally 
smashed the very Imperial throne of the Moghals at 
■ Delhi to pieces; Mahadajee Shiude held the imbecile 
Moghal Emperors as prisoners and pensioners in his 
custody and the Hindu supremacy was once more 
re-established all over the land. 

“In the meanwhile before we could recover from 
the struggle of centuries with Moslems, the English 
faced us and won on all points. We do not grudge 
them their victory. Because, though we were 
vanquished in the field yesterday, yet enough fight 
is still left in us today. We have not given up the 
struggle for lo.st. Nay, we have already returned to 
the charge.” 



S^OMB OB THE 

IMPORTANT 

RESOLUTIONS 

FROM 

1918-1937. 




5TH AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU MAHASABHA 


DELHI, DECEMBER 1918 

PRESIDENT : HON’BLE RAJA SIR RAMPAL 
SINGH, K. C. 1. E. (OUDH). 


DEMAND FOR RESPONSIBLE SELF- 
GOVERNMENT. 

Resolv^od that tliis Conference is strongly of 
opinion that tlie Indian ])eople while fully devoted to 
the British Government and sincerely desirous to 
have a lasting connection with it, are not satisfied 
with the present form of Government prevailing in 
India, and are eager to have Respoiisible Self- 
Government immediately so as to be placed on a 
footing of equality in all respects with other citizens 
of the British Empire, 

SEPARATE COMMUNAL 
REPRESENTATION, 

Resolved that this Conference re-affirms its strong 
opposition to the introduction of creed and colour 
considerations in the matter of representation in the 



164 


Legislative Councils under the new Scheme of Reforms 
and in employments under the Government and insists 
that individual merit should be the only consideration 
to the same, but in case this principle is deviated from, 
the representation of the Hindus should be fixed just 
in proportion to their numerical strength. 

This Conference further desires that if any special 
consideration is shown to any non-Hindu Community 
where it is in minority, the same consideration be 
shown to the Hindus also where they are in minority. 

That this Conference depreciates the extension of 
separation and excessive communal representation to 
local bodies in any province and protests against the 
proposals made by the Committee of the Legislative 
Council of the United Provinces to introduce such pro- 
visions in the constitution of the District Boards, as 
will have the effect of giving to the Moslems three 
times the number of seats in them as compared with 
their ratio in population. 

COW PROTECTION 

Resolved that this Conference is strongly of 
opinion that the stoppage of cow killing in Hindusthan 
would be hailed with great joy and deep thankfulness 
by the entire Hindu Community, would bring pros- 
perity to the people, and remove all cause of friction 
between the. different communities in Hindusthan, and 



165 


it therefore earnestly requests the Govt, to be so 
gracious as to take steps in consultation with the 
leading Hindus and Mohammedans that no cow would 
be killed in Hindusthan in future. 

SANSKRIT MANUSCRIPTS 

Resolved that in view of the signal services that 
Hindus have rendered to the Empire and the immense 
sacrifices they have gladly made in the prosecution of 
this horrible War, this Conference urges upon the 
British Prime Minister, the Representatives of the 
Indian Govt, on the Peace Conference and other 
members thereof, the restoration intact to Hindu- 
sthan of all Sanskrit Manuscripts and old Indian 
Instruments in German custody. 


6TH AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU MAHASABHA 


HARD WAR, APRIL 1921. 

PRESIDENT : MAHARAJA BAHADUR OE 
KASIMBAZAR 


THE NANKANA TRAGEDY 

Resolved that this Conference expresses its indig- 
nation and abhorrence at the tragic happenings at 



166 


Nankana Sahib and expresses its hearty sympathy 
with the relatives of the deceased Sikhs. 

THE “DIVIDE AND RULE” POLICY 

Resolved that this Conference is firmly of opinion 
that the movement to create split between the 
Brahmans and non-Brahamans in Southern India 
and Kumaun, and the Sikhs and the Hindus in 
the Punjab is a relic of the old “divide and rule” 
policy of interested persons and warns all Hindus not 
to play in their hands in future and to do nothing, 
which would mar Hindu union and solidarity. 

THE N. W. FRONTIER PROVINCE 
ADMINISTRATION 

Resolved that this Conference is emphatically of 
opinion that the Grovernment have miserably failed to 
give protection of life, honour and ]>roperty to the 
re‘=;idents of the North Western Province, the adminis- 
tration of which is a standing blot on the present 
system of bureaucracy. 

COW PROTECTION 

(a) That this Conference expresses its strong 
protest and resentment against the callous disregard of 
the d^ep ^leated and most cherished religious senti- 
ments of the Hindus displayed continuously by the 



167 


present Government in the matter of allowing slaugther 
of cows for the Military and export of beef, cows and 
bullocks to other countries, and is deliberately of 
opinion that the time has come when Hindus vshould 
realize that the responsibility to protect their Dharma 
in this matter lies with them and them alone, and they 
should be prepared to make all legitimate and peaceful 
efforts and undergo all sufferings and sacrifices for 
the achievement of their object. 

(b) That strong propaganda w’ork should be started 
at once to get the slaughter of cows in Hindusthan 
and their export to other countries stopped immediately 
and in case their deep religious sentiments are not 
heeded to by tl^je Government before that date, a 
special Conference of the Akhil Bharatiya Hindu 
Mahasabha be held on the next Janmashtmi, the 
sacred day of the birth of Bhagwan Shri Krishna at 
the holy place of Brindaban where the Lord tended 
the cows, with a view to decide the future line of 
action in the matter. 



168 

7TH AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU MAHASABHA 


BENARES, AUGUST 1923. 
PRESIDENT : PT. MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA 


VOLUNTEERS’ CORPei 

The Mahasabha desires the foi'maL'oii of Hindu 
Volunteers’ Corps at every village and town for the 
social service of the Hindu Community and its pro* 
tection when necessary, and declares it to be the duty 
of the members of these corps to preserve peace and 
order in their locality, in co-operation with the follow* 
ers of other religions, if possible. 

REMOVAL OP MAHARAJA OF NABHA 

It expresses its dis-satisf action and pain at the 
removal of the Maharaja of Nabha from his Gaddi 
as in its opinion no Indian Prince should be re- 
moved from his rightful inheritance without placing 
his case before the members of his order. The Maha** 
sabha thinks it necessary in the interest of justice 
and fair play, that even now his case should be placed 
before the Chamber of Princes. 

USE OF SWADESHI 

The Hindu Mahasabha enjoins upon all Hindus, 
in the interest of economic and religious welfare of 



the couutry, the duty of usiug. I'udigenous cloth only 
preferably one made of hand-spun thread. 

RECLAMATION OF MALKANAS 
The Mahasabha declares it to be perfectly legi- 
timate and proper to retake such Malkana Hindus into 
tlie fold of Hinduism as have all along observed Hindu 
customs and kept their marriage ties pure, whether 
they are Rajputs, Brahamans, Vaishyas, Jats, Gujars 
or members of any other castes. It expresses its satis- 
faction at the reclamation of the Malkanas already 
taken back into their ‘biradaries’ and expresses a hope 
that their ‘biradaries’ would gladly welcome them back 
into their fold. 

HINDUS BEYOND SEAS 

The Mahasabha expresses its, great indignation 
at the decision recently arrived at by the British Cabi- 
net with regard to the status of Indians in, Kenya and 
solemnly announces that India would never rest satis- 
fied until Indians are accorded equal treetin«nt with 
the European settlors in that Colon3% 



170 


8TH AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU MAHASABHA 


CALCUTTA, APRIL 1925. 


PRESIDENT : SHRI L. LAJPAT RAI 


COMMUNAL REPRESENTATION 
As it is essential to have one nation for peace and 
happiness and for tlie establishment and maintenance 
of Swarajya in the country; and also as the opinion of 
the committee appointed at the special session of 
Belgaon to ascertain and formulate Hindu opinion on 
the subject of Hindu-Muslim problem is that Commu- 
nal Representation in regard to national institutions and 
the services has been harmful and detrimental to 
create a united nation, Hindu Mahasabha strongly 
protests against the introduction of such a system; also 
Mahasabha appeals to its non-Hindu brothers to give 
up such anti-national demands and help the Hindus in 
establishing a national solidarity and one-ness. 



171 


9TH AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU MAHASABHA 


DETJII, MAECn 1926 . 


rLVKSIDKNT : BAJA NABINDBA NATH 


BKMOVAL OF rNTorCHABITJTY 

(a) The Hindu Mahasabha roqiK^sts all Hindus to 
remove such restraints as ma3^be existing at present 
in the way of tlie so-ealled untouchable Hindus using 
ymblic schools, public wells and public roads and 
attending public lueetings. 

(b) The Mahasabha further requests llie autho- 
rities of Hindu temples to ])rovide facilities to the so- 
called untouchable Hindus for Deva-Darslian. 

SHUDDHI. 

(a) The Hindu Mahasabha'draws the attention of 
the Hindus of all the provinces in general, and those 
of Bengal, Bihar, Assam, Central Provinces, Grujrat, 
Madras and N. W. F. Province in particular, and of 
the Hindu Sabhas of these provinces to the distressful 
state of Hindus all over the country and in the afore- 
said provinces in particular, where the numerical 



172 


defection of Hindus has been and is going on steadily, 
year by year, and Avhere Non-Hindus convert Hindu 
boys, girls and widows to their faiths by offering them 
all kinds of inducements. This Mahasabha urges the 
Hindu Sabhas and the Hindus of the above provinces 
to take steps to take back all converts into the fold of 
their ‘biradaries’ and sects after the performance of 
requisite ‘prayaschit.’ 

(b) The Mahasabha expresses the opinion tliat it 
is perfectly legitimate and proper that those Malkanas, 
Moolas and Sanyogis whether they belong to the 
Rajput, Brahman, Vaishya, Jat, Gujrati or any other 
castes, who have all along followed Hindu customs and 
whose marriage relations have been pure, should be 
taken back into their castes ( biradaries ) and sects 
after requisite ‘prayaschit’ in accordance with their 
respective customs (maryada). The Mahasabha further 
expresses its satisfaction at some of these people 
having’ been taken back into their ‘biradaries' and 
hopes that the ‘biradaries’ will welcome them in 
their fold and will try to take back at a very 
early date all those who have nOt been so far 
taken back. 

(c) It is further the opinion of the Mahasabha 
that such non-Hindus as feel reverence for and 
express faith in Hinduism should be admitted into the 
Hindu fold. 



HINDI LANGUAGE AND NAGRI ^ 
CHARACTERS. 

fa) The* Hindu Mali asabha urges the Hindus of 
all provinces and colonies to learn Hindi language, 
the ‘lingua franca’* of Hindusthan, and specially the 
Nagri script in 'which all the Hindu scriptures are 
written. Tt also enjoins Hindus residing in the pro- 
vinces where their mother-tongue is Hindi to conduct 
all their business and keep their accounts in Hindi and 
trusts that the various Hindu organisations situated in 
those provinces will conduct the business of their 
offices in Hindi. This Mahasabha calls upon the 
various Provincial Hindu Sahhas to make adequate 
arrangements for teacliing Hindi to Hindu boys study- 
ing in the Primary schools of their provinces. 

(b) This Mahasabha requests the writers and 
publishers of Sanskrit books to write and publish 
them in Deva Nagri characters instead of in their 
Provincial Scripts. 

COUNCIL ELECTIONS 

Tho Hindu Mjahasabha confirms and adopts the 
resolution of the Working Committee passed at Simla 
on the 2Brd August, 1925, to the effect that Hiiidu 
Sabhas should not put forward candidates for election 
but in case of an apprehension that any candidate is 
undesirable for and will be harmful to Hindu interests, 



174 


it should be the dut}^ of Hindu voters to oppose such 
candidate. 

The Mahasabha authorises its Working Committee 
to take, in consultation with Provincial Hindu Sabhas 
and having regard to conditions obtaining in different 
provinces, all proper steps, to safe-guard Hindu 
interests including the running of elections of its own 
(^ajidi dates where necessary. 

This Mahasabha requests and expects all political 
parties in the Legislatures so to arrange their party 
programme and work as to leave members of the 
different religious communities free to vote on matters 
affecting their own particular community. 

COMMCNAL RE PRESENT ATK )N 

The Hindu Mahasabha is emphatically of opinion : 

1. That as the principle of Communal Represent- 
ation and Separate Electorates, far from bringing the 
different communities together, has proved a serious 
hindrance to the growth of national feeling and t-o the 
smooth working of Municipal, District, Provincial and 
National Representative institutions, it is the duty of 
Hindu politicians of all shades of political opinion 
to make a determined stand against this vicious 
principle. 

2. That under no circumstances will the Hindu 



175 


Commuiiity accept any i)Gaccmeal revision of the 
Lucknow Pact in favour of any particular com- 
munity* 

3. That in aiij’’ future scheme of Provincial Auto- 
nomy or Responsible Self-Government an express 
clause be inserted declaring it illegal for any Provincial 
Government to discriminate by caste or creed in 
respect of acquisition of civic rights or posts in 
public scrviccB . 

REFORMS IN N* W. F. PROVINCE 

Whereas the administration of the N. AV* F. 
Province was separated from the Punjab with the 
express object of bringing it directly under the 
Government of India and whereas the safety of 
India from foreign aggression and also the pro- 
tection of non-Muslim inhabitants of that province 
require that the administration of that province should 
continue to be an All-India concern, and whereas 
there is largo deficit in the finance of that province 
which is made good by the C^entral Governmcmt, 
the Mahasabha is strongly opposed to the proposal to 
convert the administration of that province into a 
separate province under the Government of India Act 
and is of opinion that it should continue to remain 
under the direct administration of the Central 
Government. 



PROCESSIONAL MUSIC AND ARTI 


' (a) Th© Hindi! Mahasabha regrets to note that cases 
of unwarrantable interference with observance of 
Hfndtl religious ritesj ceremonies and festivals and 
taking out of religious ' and other processions- are 
becoming of frequent occurrence in the country. The 
■ Hi ado Mahasabha is of opinion that in the circum* 
stance of' the situation it is clearly the • duty of every 
Hindu and Hindu organisation to take every such 
concerted and legitimate step as may be necessary to 
ensure that Hindus shall be free as heretofore to 
observe their festivals and to perform their reli* 
gious rites and Ceremonies without molestation by 
any one. 

(b) The Hindu Mahasabha calls upon all Pro- 
vincial and Local Hindu Sabhas to render all 
necessary guidance and assistance to Hindus, at 
places where their rights are interfered with, in all 
legitimate steps they might take to prevent such 
interference. 



141 


pessimism and lio])elessness and believe in the well- 
known words of Tilak : ^Swaraj is our birtli-right and I 
shall have it.’ He then appreciated the activities and 
work done by I)r. Moonje in founding a military 
college which in Panditji’s opinion was a dire neces- 
sity for the Hindus. J^anditji in the end dealt with 
the problems of cow-prote('tion, commercial and indus- 
trial enterprises and gave many practical suggestions to 
carry out the schemes for them to a success. He 
alluded to the question of the uplift of the depressed 
classes and asked the Hindus to be more careful in 
this respect, to ameliorate their condition and never to 
look them down as our Shastras enjoin us to do. 

Ill the end Panditji n-iiiiounced that within 12 
months he would collect a sum of l^s* One Orore for 
the Hindu Mahasabha to carry on the work according 
to its own programme which he clearly and at great 
length ex])laiiied to tlie luige audience. 



HIS HOLINESS SHRI SHANKARACHARYA, 

( Dk. Kurtkoti ), Na8IR. 


LAHORE, OCTOBER liYMu 


*‘And freedom is only possible if the alien Faiths 
that have separate independent nations and spheres of 
activity of their own for the development of their own 
cultures are made to live here peacefully and on 
friendly terms with the Hindus. They must be made 
to understand that Hindusthan is juimarily for the 
Hindus and that the Hindus live for the preservation 
and development of the Aryan culture and tlie Hindu 
Dharma which are bound to prove beneficial to all 
humanity. 

“I affirm that in Hindusthan the national race, 
religion and language ought to bo tliat of tlie Hindus. 
With this as the basic principle of our national consti- 
tution joint electorates without any reservation of 
seats for particular groups or communities offer the 
right solution of the problem of minority representa- 
tion. It will be in conformity with the highest ideals 
of democracy and also in keeping with the principles of 
equality and other tenets for which Hinduism stands. 



But if auy guarantee or safeguard for the protection of 
any minorities is needed, the Minority Guarantee 
Treaties of the League of Nations provide it most 
effectively. 

“For while the Communal Decision delivers an 
attack from the outside, there are many fissiparous and 
cantankerous agencies within the structure of the 
Hindu society itself wliich gnaw at its vitals from 
within. There are^many evil practices and institutions 
among the Hindus tliat have crept in now and then 
since the Hindus forgot the progressive principles of 
their ancestors, whicli all conspire, to make the Hindus 
a weak and disjointed community. More than the 
Communal Decision it is these that menace Hinduism 
and the Hindus. That menace must be combatted. It 
is only when these evil agencies are buried low down 
never to risti again that the Hindus shall emerge into 
a strong, united and militant race and then alone will 
the Hindus be the worthy bearers of the torch of 
Hindu culture and Hindu Dharma. 

‘^The Hindu Mahasabha Avhich is the only premier 
representative institution of the Hindus ought to 
organize itself in such a manner as to be able to achieve 
all these objectives. There should be a strong elected 
representative executive at the centre of this body 
which can sketch the plan of action and work it out. 
Fresh blood should be infused in it by changing some 



144 


members of that executive body by rotation but con- 
sistency of policy shouid be maintained by retaining a 
few members in office for some more years. 

“The culture of a nation is vitally connected with its 
language. The stamp of a foreign culture on a nation 
can be detected from the impress of a foreign language 
on th^^ mother-tongue. Every independent nation 
guards and preserves its national language for this 
reason. Hindusthan, therefore, should insist on making 
Hindi the lingua-indica of the country. We should 
realise the fact that every foreign word admitted into 
our language spells the death of the original Hindi 
synonym of it. Such indiscreet incorporation does not 
enrich the language but on the contrary it weakens it. 
We should emphasise the purity of the Hindi language 
just as we insist on the ])urity of the Hindu culture. 

“Under the circumstances the Hindu Mahasabha 
ought to have its own representatives in the legislatures 
to guard the interests and promote the rights of the 
Hindus. The Mahasabha, therefore, should light the 
elections on its own ticket but that light should be^ on 
the clear issue of the protection of Hindu interests. 

“Hinduism has kept alive the torch of the ancient 
Aryan culture and civilization. To preserve that 
culture, it is our duty to preserve Hinduism itself, not 
as a mummified specimen in a museum of antiquities, 
but as a living growth that has come down to us from 



preached by Guru Gobind Singh. The remedy is 
there. It is for the Hindu youths to come in the field 
and practise it for themselves. Those who cannot 
afford to give their lives for the noblest cause of 
preserving their great and ancient race have got other 
modes to take part in that great ‘yajna’. The rich 
can give their riches, the learned tlieir knowledge and 
tlic. strong their strength. I liave a plan in my mind 
to establish at llelhi a home for such workers who 
would devote their lives to this noble cause It is yet 
a plan. It can materialise by offerings of life and 
wealth from some of the people who have got a 
feeling heart.” 



SHRIYUT BHIKSHU UTTAMA, BURMA. 


CAWNPORE, APRIL 1935. 


The President was highly pleased and expressed 
his thankfulness to the Hindus for appreciating his 
services rendered for the ujdift of Burmese and 
propagation of Boddha Dharma in Burma. He said, 
‘T have not done any remarkable service to Hindu 
Mahasabha and yet you have given me such a high 
honour. All this indicate that you all consider one crore 
Boddha Burmese as your brethren, you love them 
and take them as part and parcel of the great Hindu 
Society and whatever service I have done to them, you 
all highly appreciate and hold me in great estimation.*’ 
He further in his speech elucidated the fact that after 
a careful study of the Boddha and Hindu religions he 
was emphatically of opinion that ‘'Bhagwan Buddha 
was one of the staunch Hindus that ever lived. 
Buddha never gave up the Hindu Dharma; on the con- 
trary he gave to it a new colour and new life and 
extended it beyond the bounds of Hindusthan.” The 
great Bhikshu in his resentment at the policy of 
British Govt, to separate Burma from the rest of 



TTinclusthaii says, consider it ( the separation t>t 
Burma from Hindustlian ) sacriligious and take it 
110 less than cutting the Aryan culture and Aryan race 
to pieces.” He thanked the Hindu Mahasabha for 
its taking the wise step in sending their repre* 
sent^tives to Japan to attend the 2 r)th Centenary 
of T.ord Buddha to pay homage to His Blessed 
memory on behalf of the Hindus of Hindusthan. He 
criticised the policy of the Indian National Congress 
in as much as the latter is vociferous in calling Hindu 
Mahasabha as a Communal body. In the end he 
exhorted the Hindus to be more kind and considerate 
towards their brethren of depressed classes, to amelio- 
rate their condition, to make changes in their social 
and religious practices and thus to consolidate tlioir 
own ground internally. 

He at great length deplored the pro-Muslim and 
nnti-nation^^l policy of the Indian National Congress 
and refuted all allegations that Hindu Mahasabha is 
a comnuinal organization. 



SHRIYUT PT. MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA, BENARAS. 


POONA, DECEMBER 19H5. 


Tracing his coniieetioii with the Hindu Mahasabha 
since its very inception in 193 6, Pandit ji eulogised 
the services of Dr. Moonje, Bhai Parmananda and 
Lala Lajpat Rai. He then briefly described the 
activities of the Hindu Mahasabha in general and 
those of Hindu leaders in particular for obtaining 
Swarajya. “But,” he deplored, ‘‘instead of Swarajya 
an ‘Anti-Indian’ Constitution ( Communal Award ) was 
thrust upon the people of Hindusthaii. ’ He says fur- 
ther, “This is the state of things after 50 years’ struggle, 
efforts and sacrifices; our future seems to be dark; all 
cry for Swarajya but an ‘Award' is given which is anti- 
Hindu, What is this Communal Award ? This is 
nothing but the reducing of Hindus who make 75% of 
the population to a position of non-entity and in- 
significance, 1 do not have any grudge for Muslima 
but what has been awarded is unbearable for me.” 
Panditji conderuned separate electorates, and commiinal 
riots and exhorted Hindus and Muslims to be considerate 
and thoughtful. He asked the Hindus to give up 



185 


All Partitas (.\)iivoiitioii; but, as Moslem opinion 
as represented in the All India Moslem Con- 
ference held at Delhi during the X’rnas Vacations 
has rejected that Report, tlie Hindu Maliasabha 
believing as it does that commiinalism is funda- 
inontally opposed to nationalism reiterates its ori- 
ginal essentially nationalistic position and calls upon 
all Hindus to work for and support a Constitution 
based on the priuci])les which were pro])ounded by the 
last Jubbul])ore JSessioii of the Hindu Maliasabha and 
are re-stated as below in a sliglitly amended form to 
suit tin? present circumstances: — 

(a) That there shall be uniformity of franchise for 
all communities in eacli province. 

(b) Tluit elections to all the elective bodies shall be 
by mixed electorates. 

(c^ Tliat there shall be no reservation of seats on 
communal eon si derations in any of tlie Elective Bodies 
and Educational Institutions. 

(d ) That the basis of rejiresentation of different 
communities shall be uniform, such as voting strengtli 
or taxation. 

(e) Tliat there shall be no communal representation 
in the Public Services which must be open to all com- 
munities on tlio basis of merit and competeiK^y ascer*^ 
tallied through open, competitive tests. 



(f) That the re-distribution of provinces in Hindu- 
sthan, if and when necessary, shall be made on their own 
merits in the light of principles capable of a general 
application with due regard to administrative, financial, 
strategic and similar other considerations but no new 
province shall be created with the object of giving a 
majority therein to any particular community. 

2. The Reform Scheme, in its entirety or otherwise, 
will neither be workable nor beneficial in the North- 
West Frontier Province, owing to the ])eculiar condi- 
tions — geographical, financial and political obtaining iu 
this province, and that it is sure to be detrimental to 
good Grovernment and highly prejudical to all-India 
interests. 

. 3. That with regard to the Moslem demands for 
sej|>aratioii of Sindh from the Bombay Presidency and 
for reservation of one third of elected seats in the 
Central Legislature for the Moslems, Hindu Mahasal>ha 
resolves that in view of the fact : 

(a) that the creation of new provinces primaiily or 
solely with a view to increase the number of provinces 
in which a particular commnuity shall be iti majority 
is fraught with danger to the growth of sound national- 
ism in the country and will divide India into Hindu 
India and Muslim India; 

(b) that the redistribution of any province without 



187 


the consent aiirJ agreement of the two major eommn- 
nities residing* in that ]>rovince is likel3^ to increase the 
area of coininnnal conflict {ind eiiflariger the relations 
between the two major communities not onh^ in that 
province but througliout Hiiidnstlian; and 

(c) that tlie separation of Sind will not only^ be a 
costly financial jiro position, but would also arrest its 
economic develojnnent and its educational advancement 
and deprive the people of Sind of the maiij" undenialde 
benefits of their association with the more advanced 
people of the other ]>arts of tlie Bombay Presidency in 
their economic as well as ]>olitical d(‘velopments; 

Sind slioiild nol be si^jiarnted ,from the Bombay 
Pre^idenev. ' 

111 view of the fact tlnn the priiin^ object of tlie 
H indu Mahasabha is (h exorcize (‘ommuiialism as 
rapidly as possible from the public administration of 
the coiintiy, the FI indu Malmsaldia is unable to 
agree to the reservation of 1 /drd of the elected seats 
in the Central Legislature for the Moslems, 

THE COMING ELECTIONS AND THE 
HINDU MAHASABHA 

Resolved that the Hindu Mahasabha authorises its 
Working Committee to do everything needful as it 
may think best in the name of the Hindu Mahasabha 



in respect, of the forthcoming i^emn’al elections to the 
Legislatures. 


13TH AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU MAHASABHA 


AKOLA, AUGUST wm, 

PKESIDKXT : SYT. (\ VLIIAUAGIIA \VA( U ALIAL 


CENSUS OV INDIA 

This (^>Jiference miplintically deprecntes tlu* policy 
of the Govt, in arrano-ine ciMisns statistics in suc'h a 
wav as to lessen seejnin;L>’ly the inniii>er of tlie Hincln 
jjopnlatioii of liinclustiian i\v etnnneratin^ varions 
Hindu sectioiis and coinnuiniiies as non-Hindus. 
Tliis MahasaWiaj in discharge of its duty, will continue 
to treat all such people and classes as continuing 
within the fold of Hinduism, and would respectfully 
protest against Govt, excluding these people from the 
Hindu Comrniinity for any purpose political or 
administrative. 

ROl'ND TABLE CONFERENCE AND 
THE HINDUS 

The Hindu Mahasabha emphatically protests 
that the representation of the Hindus, in the same 



eomnmjial seiise in whicli the Muslims arn represented 
on the Round Table Conferenee, is iiiade([riat(‘. and 
highh" (hdeetive and particularly in 

so far as : — 

fa) there is jiot one sino-le re])resentative of the 
Hindus of Sindh and of the X. W. F. Provinces while 
there ar(‘ two representati\'es of i\luslims of Sindh and 
one of those of the X, \V. F. Province and, 

(b) there ivS no repr(‘sentati\'e of the Hindus on 
Federal Structure Oominittee in tin* same communal 
sense in which the ^luslims are represented by Mr. 
Jinnah and Sir M.. Sliafi. the Presidents of the two 
sections of the Mu>lim Fea;:>ue and T)r. Shafait 
Ahmed Khan. 

The Hindu Mahasahlia liereby declares that in 
view of the fact that tin* Hindus of Sindli were not 
represented on tlie Houjid Table FoidVrence and its 
Sindh Sub-Committee^ tlie decisioi^s of the Sub* 
Committee are exparte and, therefore, absolutely un- 
acoeptable to the Hindus generally and to the Hindus 
of Sindh, who have already vehemently repudiated 
the decisions of the Sub-Committee, especially. 

FUTURE REFORMS 

111 regard to the Round Table Conference the 
Hindu Mahasabha respectfully warns the Government 
that the people of Hiudiisthau are in no mood to be 



s^atislied witli anything less than inmiediate full 
Dominion Status and full I?esponsible Government; this 
Conference while being emphaticall}^ of opinion that 
Hindustlian is quite capable of taking over immediate- 
ly full responsibility for its own Government, puts on 
record its desire that the Round Table Cbnference 
may prove a success and that peace and friend- 
ship may be established between Ihigland and 
Hindustlian 

(a) That, in case a certain trajisitory period as 
regards the defence of the country and imj)erial 
foreign policy be still considered needed, such period 
should not exceed ten years when those s[)ecial r(*ser- 
vations should automatically cease to operate. 

(b) That even during such a period of transition 
there should be a minister or ministers in charge of the 
reserved subjects and the ministers shall be appointed 
by the Viceroy from among the elected members 
of the Central T.ogislature. 

fc) That recruitment of officers holding King's 
Commissions in the Indian Army, Navy and Air 
Force should be made in India from the Indian 
Army, Navy and Air Force irrespective of consi- 
derations of caste or creed of the so-called martial 
and non-martial classes, subject always to the requisite 
standard of efficiency; provided that, it shall be open 
to the Government of India to provide for recruitment 





ia England to ftll up such of tlie vacancies as may not 
1)0 filled ill India. 

(d) That all arrangements should be made for ilm 
intensive military training of Indian boys by establish- 
ing Military Schools and Rifle Associations and ^»rganis- 
ing Gymnasiums for tlie training of boys in the indige- 
nous arts of self-defence such as ‘lathi' plaj^, sword-play, 
etc. and encouraging boys to join University Traiiiing 
Corps and young men to join the Territorial Force. 

UNITY TALKS AND MAHASABHA 

This Conference while acknowledging that the 
s(dienie of communal compromise as pro])osed by tlie 
Working Committee of the Congress marks an advance 
towards the settlement on national lines, considers 
it unsatisfactory and unacceptable on the following 
grounds : — 

(a) That it discriminates betwiuni Hindu and Muslim 
Minorities and fixes, in re8])ect thereof in its scheme 
of protection, an artificnal and arbitrary limit of % 
evidently to exclude the important Hindu Minorities 
in Bengal and the Punjab from the advantages of 
protection provided in the scheme. 

(b) That it provides for the ])rotection of the 
Muslim Minority of 29 7o Assembly, reserving seats 
for them on the population basis with power to contest 
additional seats while similar protection is denied to 



flic: Ilin lu Minority ot the Punjab wbi<'h is said to 
ln('n now rodijoed fr'Uii 30% to 20%. 

(c) 'ritat it ha?- pi acric-ally treatt^d the esse3)tiall3^ 
eonstilu! jouai question of residuary powers as a com- 
innna] quivsii<.>ii and lias, ag-ain^t the almost uiianinious 
Hindu opinion, decided that they shall vest in tlu‘ ])ro- 
vinces instead of in the (.‘eiitra] GovtTnment even 
supjH'sing that the }jro])osed Federalisin becomes an 
accoinplislied fact. 

(d; That it has treated the Muslim demand foi’ the 
separation of Sindh apart from the general question of 
adjustment of l)oundaries of jiroviiK^es which can 
only be settled through expert examination a 

Boundaries Commission, and that it lias conceded tlie 
Muslim deiriand for sejKiration in idOuMlisregard of the 
determincl and reasoned o]>position of the Hindus of 
Sindh who will thus be forced to bear a larger pro})or- 
tion of the iiK* vital >le iiKTease of taxation in relation to 
their population as compared with the Muslims of 
Sindh and be called upon to \)i\y for a thing whi(di. they 
naturally liate and have to forego the advantages 
accruing from the well-developed sj^stem of Cxovern* 
ment of an advanciul ]>roviiice like Bombay and to 
submit to a ba(*kward Government derivkig its in<!ep- 
tion from ])urely commerical interests. 

(e) That it has introduced tlie novel and startling 
principles of minimum qualifications for public 



19B 


services which is bound to afl’oct the efficiency irres- 
])cctive of considerations of caste or creed, besides it 
is iineoiuniercial to recruit inferior talent at high price 
involving injusticti to superior talent by placing it at a 
discount merely to placate this or that community. 

(f) The Hindu ^^lahasablm has no objection to the 
further woi'hing of fj'anchise and even to adult fraii- 
(diise; but if adult fram-hise be proved impractical for 
any reason at the ])resent stage then the Mahasabha 
ein])hatically insists, that the franchise should be uni- 
form iiTes])eetive of the fact whether it reflects or does 
not reflect in the electoral roll the ])ro]>ortioii of 
population of every commuiiiiy. 


14TH AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU MAHASABHA 


DELHI, SEPTEMBER VXV>, 


PRESIDEJfT : SYT. N. 0. KELKAR 


POONA PACT 

(a) This Session of the Mahasabha is immensely 
delighted to learn that a settlement has been arrived 
at between the leaders of the so-called depressed 
classes and the caste Hindus at Poona and that 



194 


summary of the same has been cabled to the Prime- 
Minister for certification and immediate ainiouncement 
of its acceptance to enable Maliatma Gandhi to brefik 
his fast. 

(b) The Conference lieartily congratulates the 
leaders of all the parties concerned in the negotiation j 
Mahatma Gandhi particularl3% on the successful ter- 
mination of the negotiationv*!. 

(c) The Conference feels very mucli concerned at 
the report of the state of health of Mahatma Gaiidlii 
issued by Pr. Gilder and most earnestly prays to the 
Almighty God to grant him strength to bear the 
heavy strain caused by fasting and negotiations alike. 

(d) The Conference calls upon the (bnmriiment to 
dispense with the proposed procedures of consulting 
the Provincial Govts, in the matter, as public opinion 
in every Province has already asserted itself in un- 
mistakable terms in favour of any settlement that may 
be arrived at to save the life of Mahatma Gandhi. 

(e) The Conference hopes that the Government of 
India will not delay in transmitting the wliole of tlio 
settlement by cable with their approval of the same 
and urging on tlie Prime Minister to alter the Award 
accordingly and make the necessaiy announcement 
immediately. 

( lb S.— Bhai Parmanaiidaji could not atteneii the 



Couferenee, but lie vsent liis priiitefi message opposing 
the passage of this resblutioiu ) 

COMMUNAT. AWAiri) 

(i) This Session of the Akliil l^haratiya ITindn 
Mahasabha strongly condemns the decision of iln^ 
Ihdtisli Ciovt, on tlie, following, among other 
grounds : — 

(a) That it maintains and extends the seo])0 of 
separate commnhal electorates against all canons of 
democratic, responsible and representative (iovernmont 
whicli the British (fovt, are pledged to establish in 
Mindusthan. 

(b) That it belies the Briine Minister's own decla- 
ndion in the House of Commons on Ibrli January 
IJBI, emphatically condeiuniug communal electorates 
and weiglitages in representation as they leave no 
iv>om f(»r Natioual-Polihcal ( Organizations or ihirties. 

tc) Thnt it flouts the unaiiiiuous o])inion of the vast 
Hindu Community^ of the Hiklis, of important sections 
of Muslims, Christians, and Depressed Classes and also 
of tlio Women of India in favour of Joint Electorates. 

(d) That it practically forces separate communal 
electorates on unwilling Hindu minorities in the 
Punjab and Bengal. 

(e) That it even extends se|)arate electorates to 
women against their agreed demands to the contrary. 



(f ) . Tliat in the name of protection of minorities? it 
has only granted protection to Muslims whether they 
form majority or minority; while not only no protec- 
tion has been granted to Hindu minorities but they 
liave even been de])rived of a part of their representa- 
tion, which tliey are entitled to, on tlie basis of their 
proportion in }) 0 ])nlation. 

(g) That it provides for differential treatment of 
minorities favouring ^fuslim ami European miix^rities 
in that : — 

(1) it adds an artificial and arbitrary weiglitage to 
the representation of Muslim minorities; 

(2) it reduces tlie represeiitation of the TTiiulu 
minorities of B(mga] and Punjab below wliat they are 
entitled to on the basis of their ])roportion to the 
population: 

(3) it denies to the Sikhs the weiglitage in repre- 
sentation which it grants to Muslim minority under 
similar condition; 

(4) it grants to European and Anglo-Indian mino- 
rities a weightage of representation which is grossly 
out of proportion to their strength in population; 

(5) it reduces the representation of the Hindu mino- 
rities of Bengal and the Punjab to what- is flagrantly 
out of proportion to their contributions to taxation and 



l\)7 


to the culture, charitable beiiefa(*tioiis and general 
])rogress of their respective Provinces. 

(h) It destroys the communal equipoise of the 
lAicknow Pact wliich was an agreed solution of the 
Coinmuual problem and which was endorsed even b}^. 
Simon Commission in the absense of any other 
ngr(‘efl solution. 

( ii ) That the Communal Decision is not an award 
of an arbitrator to which the parties concerned 
are committed but it is tlu^ decision of tlie British 
( Joverniiuuit. 

(iii) That the contention that an agreed Indian 
solution of the communal ])rol)lem is not forth'Coming 
is unwarrantable in as mucli as: — 

(a) Tlie problem was, at its origin, the creation of 
the (fovernment itself; 

(b) its solution has been obstructed b}^ conditions 
created by Govt, sncli as the publication of Govt, of 
India’s despatch on Simon Commission practically 
conceding in advance almost all the demands of the 
Muslims and the exclusion of nationalist Muslims from 
the Round Table Conference. 

(iv) That therefore as circumstances fovourable to 
an agreed solution do not exist, the Hindu Mahasabha, 
in accordance with its previous resolutions, recommends 
that the communal problem of Hindusthan be settled, 



on all India basis, on the lines of the -Internation- 
al Communal Award as embodied in rainoxdties 
Guaranteed Treaties to which His Majesty's Govt, and 
the Government of India are already committed as 
parties and signatories, and wliich, in the words of Mr. 
Henderson now form part of the public law of Europe 
and of the World, guaranteeing to minorities full 
protection, linguistic*, cultural, educational and I'cdigious 
but not through se]>arate communal electorates. The 
Hindu Mahasablia invites all other communities to 
stand for this International Communal Award formu- 
lated by the highest Arbitral Body of the wr>rld as 
their agreed solution of the (bmmunal problem, 

(v) That in case the Communal Award is not 
suitably modified within reasonable time the Hindu 
Mahasabha calls upon the Hindus to take all steps 
necessary both in legislatures and outside for frustrat- 
ing the objects of the Anglo-Muslim Alliance on 
which it is based, and directs the Working Committee 
to pre])are a programme of work to give effect to it. 

NEPAL. 

The Hindu Mahasabha feels highly cleliglited at 
the accession to the “gaddi’’ of Prime-Ministership, 
of His Highness Yudhvir Shamsher Jung Bahadur 
Eana who highly values the solidarity of Hindus of 
Hindusthan including Nepal and outside it, and the 



199 


duty of ])rofcectiiig Hindu culture and religiou. Tlie 
Maliasablia prays for long life and health of His 
Highness. 

RAiSHIdllYA KWAYAM SEWAIv SANGH. 

The Hindu Maliasablia appreciates the eiForts of 
Dr. Hedgcwar for starting a sti’ong organisation of 
Hindus named Rashtrij^a Swayaiu Sewak Sangli in C. P. 
and Berar and other places and recommends that its 
brandies be established in All Provinces so that it may 
be an Akhil Bharatiya Organisation. 

MUSLIM STATES 

That in view of complaints having been received 
regarding grievances of the Hindu citizens of the 
Mbslem States of Hyderabad fXizam), Bho])al, 
.Bahawalpur and Rainpur in resi’iect of rocruitnient to 
public services in tlie States, observances of religious 
practices, facilities for education and imposition of alien 
language, the Hindu Mahasablia Session authorises 
the AVorking Committee to appoint a Obminittee of 
Enquiry to ascertain the actual facts of the situation, 
inviting C0‘0])eration from the officials of the States 
and bringing them to the notice of the authorities 
concerned. The Session hopes that the State autho- 
rities will give all facilities to the people to hold the 
Ooufei'ences to ventilate their grievances openly. 



200 


15TH AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU lYAHASABHA 


AJMER, OCTOBER 1933. 


PRESIDENT : SYT. BHAI PARMANANDA 

COMMUNAL PROBLEM OF HINDUSTHAN 
AND THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS 

(a) The Hindus, even where they are in minorities in 
Provinces like Bengal, Punjab, Sindh & NAV.F. are on 
principle opposed to communal electorates and reserva- 
tions of any form at any stage for any community in 
any province a^s a complete negation of any Responsible 
Government and Dominion Constitution and declare 
with one voice for such, recognition of minorities and 
their safeguards as is laid down with the common 
consent of tlie principal nations of the world, including 
Hindusthaii and England, in the treaties called Mino- 
rities Treaties signed by them and enforced on so 
many Sovereign States of Europe including Turkey, 
as a world solution of the communal problem to 
o])erate as part of *^The Public Law of Europe and 
of the World” in the authoritative words of Mr. 
Arthur Henderson, President of the Disarmament 
Conference. 



In this connection the Hindu Mahasabha reminds 
the Government and communities concerned of the 
following statements of the principles of Minority 
Protection made at Geneva by Sir Austen Chamber- 
lain and other leaders: — 

(i) “The object of the Minorities Treaties was to 
secure for the Minorities that measures of protection 
and justice which wpiild gradually prepare them to be 
merged in the national community to which they 
belonged.'’ (Sir Austen Chamberlain.^ 

(ii) “It seems to mo obvious that those who 
conceived this system of protection of Minorities did 
not dream of creating within certain States a group of 
inhabitants who would regard themselves as perma- 
nently foreign to the general organisation of the 
couzitry.” ( M. De Mello Franco. ) 

(iii) “We must avoid creating a State within a 
State. We must prevent the Minority from trans- 
fortning itself into a privileged caste and taking 
definite form as a foreign group,” ( M. Blociszewski . ) 

(iv) privileges were granted to the Minority, 
inequality would be created between* this Minority 
and the Majority, this latter would be oppressed by 
the Minority and it would then the Majorities’ ques- 
ttoii which wonld have to engage the attention of tiui 
League of Nations.” ( M. Bend^^mis. ) 



202 


(b) The Hindu Mahasablia holds both the Govt, 
of India and His Majesty’s Govt, to this international 
solution of the communal problem to which they are 
bound in Law, Morality and Justice, as contributories, 
signatories and parties thereto, as a step towards 
world peace. 

(c) The Hindu Mahasablia endorses the olficial 
view that the consent of communities concerned is ne- 
cessary for a communal settlement, and in furtherance 
of that view stands up to the maintenance of ‘status 
quo’ as regards the existing communal position and 
arrangements in the existing constitution pending any 
new settlement among communities. 

It takes its stand upon the findings on the subject 
of the Simon Commission who have ruled out the 
the necessity for any fresh Communal Award. 

It therefore holds the present Government'gi 
Communal Award as entirely uncalled for and un- 
justifiable on the above cosiderations and also as being 
against the wishes of about eighty per cent of the 
Indian people, comprising Hindus, Sikhs, Indian 
Christians, Parsis, Indian Jeivs and the entire Indian 
wometihood, irrespective of caste or creed. 

If inspite of these weighty considerations and in 
defiance of all parallel and precedent History, the 
British Government forces upon India, this discredited 



device of eonnnimal elect oruie and resi‘rvations for the 
protection merely of Moslem majorities and minori- 
ties, the Hindu Mahasahha warns them that it will 
lead to unprecedented complications, to communal 
separation not in I legislatures, but also in Ad- 

ministration and the Bervdees and nltimately even to 
separation of Purse, each community claiming that 
the amount of its separate represimtation should de- 
pend upon that of its contribution to revenue and 
in taxes. 


II 

The Hindu Maliasabha in this inoinentons auiiual 
gatlieriiig at the historic city of Ajmer appeals under 
article XI of League Convenant in the name of India 
to the League of Nations of* vchich she is an original 
member of the application to her of those principles 
and inethod.s of Minority j)rot«^tioii \v]ii(di are en- 
dorsed and made operative by world opinion on the 
subject and on the initiative of the priiua'pal Allied 
and Associated Powers, including India and England, 
and emphatically points out that the parties to these 
stipulation are especially bound by the following reso- 
lutions adopted at the Third Assembly of the I^eague 
of Nations. : — 

“The Assembly expresses the hope that the States 
which are not bound by any legal obligation to the 



League with respect to Minorities Avill iievertlielesG 
observe in the treatment of their own racial, religious 
and linguistic minorities at least as high a standard of 
justice and tolei'atioa as is required by any of the 
i Minority ) Treaties and by the regular action of 
the Council.'’ 


LABOUR AND CAPITAL 
While disunion and class conflict^ exist in liidia, 
this Session of the Hindu Mahasabha expressing 
its fullest sympathy Avith the need for the ameliorntif)ii 
of the condition of the labour and the tenantry, strong- 
ly disapproves of any movement such as extinction 
of the capitalists and landlords as a class in as much 
as such movements will further accentuate divisions 
and sub-divisions bringing about class Avar Avhich will 
ultimately retard all progreiss and make redemption of 
India impossible. 

AGAINST SEPARATION OF SIND 
The 15th Session of the Akhil Bharatiya Hindu 
Mahasabha strongly condemns the proposed separation 
of Sind from Bombay on the following grounds: — 

(a) That the case of separation of Sind was reject- 
ed by the Bombay Provincial Committee attached to 
the Simon Commission, the Chairman of which was a 
Sindhi Moslem* 



iior; 

(b) That the ( 1 overumeiit have ignored the uiiani- 
inons and determined opposition of the Hindu minority 
of Sind who were not given a chance to repr#>sent their 
case in any of the three Round Table Conferences when 
Moslems were given two, if not three, such chances. 

Thus the decision of separation of Sind is an 
exparte decision in a pure and naked form. 

fc) That separated Sind Ijeing pronounced offi- 
cially to be a deficit province with a yearly deficit of 
not less than eigJity lacs, it will be another piece of 
injustice if the deficit is made good by subvention 
from the revenues of the Central Government and also 
of provinces mostly suffering Irom their own deficits 
to which the largest contribution is made by the 
Hindus of India who are opposed to separation equally 
with the Hindus of Sind. 

(d) That the constitution of Sind into a separate 
province with the help of subvention from the Central 
Government will constitute a breach of faith in the 
face of clear ruling given by Lord Russell, the 
Chairman of Sind Committee — ‘that the recommend- 
ation of Sub-Committee is that if Sind is not able to 
stand financially on its own legs, separation does not 
take place.’ 

(e) That in view of acute depression in trade, 
agricultural produce, in price of land in Sind, and 



uncertain facts invol\'erl in all the (estimates of the 
lihancial and economic consequences of Sukkar 
Barrage, the present time is most inopportune for 
es^timating the normal deficit of the province and the 
taxes to be raised for the normal growth of the ex- 
penditure, and the best interests of the country and 
the province demand that so important an issue as 
constituting Sind into a separate Governor’s Province, 
which will saddle Sind with heavy financial responsi- 
bility, should not be considered. 

HINDU MAHASABHA DEPUTATION TO 
ENGI.AND 

The Hindu Mahasabha appreciates the services 
rendered to Hindus by Bhai Parmanandaji. Doctor 
B. S. Moonje, Mr. B. C. Chatterji, Pandit Nanakchand, 
Prof. H. L. Chablani, Rai Saheb Mehrchand Khanna, 
Messrs. J. L. Banner ji, G. A, Gavi and R. R. Desh- 
mukh and resolves that whilst the Joint Parliamentary 
Committee is still in session steps be taken to enlighten 
the British public and the political leaders in England 
with the Justice of the Hindu cause as advocated by 
the Hindu Mahasabha. 

ARYAN CULTURAL BROTHERHOOD 

This Sessibn of the Hindu Mahasabha recognises 
the fundaihbtitar umt^ of ancient Aryan Culture of 



207 


India and of countries outside India suck ss Cliiiia, 
Japan, Siam, Ceylon, etc, and requests the organisers 
of the Hindu Educational Institutions to found chairs 
for the study of Japanese, Chinese and Siamese langu- 
age and literature and the respective Governments of 
China, Japan etc. to found similar chairs for the study 
of Sanskrit. 

This Sabha further authorises the President to 
organise deputations and take other necessary steps. 

This Mahasabha appreciates the recent action pf 
the German Government towards promoting Sanskrit 
learning and culture. 

UNITY CONFERENCE 

Whereas in the opinion of the Hindu Mahasabha 
all efforts up-till-now towards communal unity and 
amity have been at a distinct sacriiice of nationalistic 
principles and have encouraged communalism, espe- 
cially amongst the Moslems, the Mahasabha, while 
still appreciating and instinctively supporting all moves 
for unity amongst communities of Indja, calls upon 
the Hindu organisations especially and the Hindus of 
India generally that they shall not, in any Unity 
Committee or Confermice in future sacrifice or even 
compromise nationalism for any kind of communal 
arrangement or adjustment. 

This Session of Mahasabha deplores the lacfe , of 



208 


feeling nr fraternity amongst the Hindus and emphati- 
cally declares that no progress towards nationalism is 
possible unless the Hindus organise themselves, as 
through that alone lies the means to permanent unity 
for com nu mi ties inhabiting Hindusthan. 


16 TH AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU MAHASABHA 


CAWNPORE, APRIL 1935. 


PRESIDENT : SYT. BHIKSHU OTTAMA 


COMMUNAL AWARD 

(a) That the Hindu Mahasabha reiterates its 
complete condemnation of the Communal Decision of 
His Majesty’s Government as it is Anti-National and 
glaring unjust, particularly to Hindus and Sikhs and 
declares its determination to carry on a campaign 
against the said Communal Decision until it is replac- 
ed by a more equitable solution. 

(b) That this Session of the Hindu Mahasabha 
deplores the action of the Congress Party in the Le- 
gislative Assembly in not voting against the resolution 
in the Assembly, accepting the so- called Communal 



209 


Award and thus failing not only to reflect the true 
Hindu opinion on the subject but even to carry out 
their own election pledges with regard to it. 

THANKS TO JAPANESE PEOPLE 
This Session of the Hindu Mahavsabha records 
its cordial thanks to the organisers of the World 
Buddhist Conference and the Japanese people in 
general for the generous reception accorded by them 
to the delegates sent by the Hindu Mahasabha to that 
Conference which met last year in Tokyo to celeberate 
twenty-fifth C'entenary of J^ord Buddha. 

BUDDHA DAY AS PUBLIC HOLIDAY 
In view of the fact that Lord Buddha is venerated 
and worshipped by millions of devotees all over the 
world, not only by the Buddhists but also by Hindus 
of all sects and schools, this Session of the Hindu 
Mahasabha earnestly requests the Government of India 
to declare the Vaisakha Purnima which comes off this 
year ( 1935) on the 18th of May as a public holiday in 
India as it is already in Burma and Ceylon in as much as 
thivS day is triplicate sacred, being the day of not merely 
of his Nativity but also of his Bodha and Parinirvana, 

PROVINCIAL COUNCIL-ELECTIONS 

This Session of the Mahasabha is of opinion 
that the forth-coming elections to the Provincial 



210 


Councils should be contested with a view to protecting 
and upholding the Hindu interests in the legislatures 
and leaves it to the Provincial Sabhas to take neces- 
sary steps in that connection. 

INDIA BILL 

(a) This Session of the Hindu Mahasabha is of 
opinion that the Government of India Bill, now before 
the Parliament, is totally unacceptable to every section 
of Indian opinion and should not be proceeded with 
any further, as the constitution it purposes is regarded 
on all hands as much w'orse than the existing one, and 
is even reactionary and obstructive to the growth 
of nationalism and democracy chiefly on account of 
its communal scheme which will keep communities 
constantly estranged from eacli other. 

(b) In veiw of the fact that the British Parlia- 
ment is so constituted that it is incapable of reflecting, 
much less, representing Indian opinion and interests 
in any way; further, in view of the fact that the consti- 
tution-making, now in progress for India by the 
Parliament has not satisfied any set?tinn of opinion in 
India, this Session of the Hindu Mahasabha is of opi- 
nion that the situation calls for a radically different 
constitutional procedure whereby the task of consti- 
tution making for British India should be left as the 
concern of the Emperor of India and the Indian 



people on the lines of the Statute lof Westminister 
and the Political Conventions operating in the case 
of the Self -'governing Dominions and also having 
regard to the Eoyal Titles Act of 1876 and its legal 
implications. 


17TH AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU MAHASABHA 


POONA, DKCT.MBER 1935. 


PRESIDENT : SYT. PT. M. M. MALAYIYA 


REFORMS 

’'Phe Hindu Mahasabha is em]>haticall 3 ’' of opinion 
that, considering the legitimate political demands of 
the Indian people, the Government of India Act is a 
highly inadequate, unsatisfactoiy and disappointing 
measure, in that it is designed more to tighten the 
grip of British rule over India and to disintegrate 
Indian public life than to transfer real power to the 
people of India. 

The Mahasabha further condemns the Act as it has 
sacrificed the interests of the Hindu Community tb 
those of the other communities in India. 



The Mahasablia is of opinion that elections to 
the Legislatures should be contested with a view to 
protecting and upholding the Hindu interests in the 
Legislatures and leaves it to the Provincial Hindu 
Sabhas to take steps in that connectio]! wherever 
necessar5^ 

CONSTITUTION OF THE AHMV AND 
OTHER FORCES 

The Hindu Mahasablia emphatically protests against 
the policy of the Government in ])ref erring persons 
from a few provinces and from a few specified classes 
only, for recruitment to the Army and other forces 
and not distributing recruitment over all the provinces 
and classes of people in India; and it requests the 
Government so to constitute the Army as to enable all 
the provinces and classes of people to equitably bear 
the burden of India’s Defence, 

MILITARY SCHOOLS AND VOLUNTEER 
CORPS 

The Hindu Mahasabha is firmly of opinion that in 
order to enable the Hindus to defend their hearths 
and homes better and to take their proper share in 
the defence of the country, immediate steps should be 
taken to improve their physique and to give them the 
necessary Military training, by establishing Military 
Schools and Volunteer Corps. 



213 


The Maha«jabha welcomes the establishment at the 
instance of Dr. B. S. Moonje of the Central Hindu 
Military Education Society which is trying to establish 
the Bhonsala Military School and appeals to all 
Hindus to support the scheme. 

COMMUNAT. AAV ADD 

The Hindu Mahasabha condemns the Communal 
Award as it is grossly unjust to Hindus and Sikhs, is 
anti-national and undemocratic and makes the growth 
of Responsible Government in India impossible. 

The Hindu Mahasabha calls upon the Hindus and 
Sikhs to carry on agitation against the Communal 
Award until it is replaced by a National system of 
representation. .. 

The Mahasabha reaffirms its faith in the solution 
of the problem of minorities laid down by the League 
of Nations. 


SHAHIDGANJ AFFAIR 

The Hindu Mahasabha notes with serious concern 
the deplorable situation created by the Shahidganj 
agitation in Lahore and outside Lahore involving the 
loss of property and lives of Hindus and Sikhs and 
directs the W orking Committee to take steps to make 
such enquiry as it may deem fit to investigate into 
the happenings of Shahidganj affair taking into 



account such evidence as may have been already taken 
in a responsible manner, in order to advise and to 
suggest such steps and measures as may be calculated 
to safe-guard the interests and rights of Hindus 
and Rikhs. 

REMOVAL OF UNTOUOHABIIJTY 
The Hindu Maha Rabha reaffirms its previous 
resolutions for giving equal access to all Hindus irres- 
pective of their particular caste or c*,ree(l and to all 
public amenities and institutions siudi as schools, wells, 
tanks, ghats, places of water supply, hotels, roads, 
parks, dharmasalas, public ])laces of worship, burning 
ghats, and the like. 

The Hindu Maha Rabha further affirms its faith 
that untoucliability must not be regarded as a part of 
Hindu religion or social system. 

The Mahasabha recommends to Hindus the aboli- 
tion of all distinctions in the Hindu Society based on 
birth or caste in the spheres of public, social and politi- 
cal life in which such distinctions ought to have no 
application and are out of place in the present age. 

VIR V. D. SAVARKAR 
The Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha strongly 
protests against the high-handed action of the Govern- 
ment of Bombay in putting unnecessary restrictions 
upon the movements and activities of Vir V. D. 



21.5 


Savafkar, Bar-at-Law, by confining him at Ratnagiri for 
years together. 

It notes with gratefulness the splendid services 
which Mr. Savarkar has been rendering to tlie cause 
of Hinduism and urges the Govt, to remove all restric- 
tions imposed upon him at present so as to enable 
him to serve more fully and completely his religion, 
community and country. 

CONDEMNATION OF BIHAR CIRCULAR 

The Hindu Mahasabha strongly condemns the 
circular issued by the Bihar Govt, in relation to 
important members of the Arya Samaj and Hindu 
Sabha to check and obstruct their propaganda among 
the tribal Hindus of Chhota Nagpur, misnamed the 
Animists, among whom hundreds of Christian Mission- 
aries have been not only allowed but helped and 
encouraged in every possible way to carry on pro- 
selytising activities and convert lacs of them to their 
own fold. While the Hindu Mahasabha notes with sa- 
tisfaction the protest made against it by the members of 
the Bihar Council and notes further that the assurance 
has been given on behalf of the Bihar Govt, in this 
connection, it is definitely of opinion that the circular 
should be withdrawn, in as much as it is flagrantly 
unjust and is calculated in effect to seriously obstruct 
legitimate Hindu Missionary propaganda in those non^ 
regulated areas. 



216 


18TH AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU MAHASABHA 

LAHORE, OCTOBER 1936. 


PRESIDENT : HIS HOLINESS SHRI JAGADGURU 
SHANKRACHARYA 


HINDI-GURMUKHI 

This Conference strongly condemns the anti Hindi- 
Gurmukhi Circular issued by the N. W. F. P. Govt, 
in the Transferred Department which is a direct attack 
on the language and culture of the Hindu and Sikh 
minorities in the N. W . F. Province. It is further re- 
solved that deputation of the Akhil Bharatiya Hindu 
Mahasabha should wait upon H. E., the Vicerory and 
the Sikh leaders should also be approached to join the 
deputation. 

CONDITION OF THE HINDUS IN THE MUSLIM 
AND SOME OF THE HINDU STATES 

Th Hindu Mahasabha strongly protests against the 
policy of the Governments of Bhopal, Hyderabad, 
(Deccan), Bahawalpore, Malerkotal, Lohnru, Alwar, 
Khetri (Jaipur), and Pataudi States in depriving Hindu 
subjects of their fundamental religious and civic rights. 



217 


ThB Maliasablia further resolves to appoint one 
Bub-committee for each State to investigate and to 
report on the conditions prevailing in each State and 
to take such steps as they think fit in order to secure 
justice to- the Hindu Community. 

The Committees appointed as aforesaid will make 
their report with a special reference to the question 
of music in Hyderabad State, obstruction for Shuddhi 
work and safety of Hindu Women in Bhopal State, 
compulsion for Muslim dress in Bahawalpur State, and 
the grievances regarding Hindi and other colloquial 
languages in the States. 

The Working Committee is authorised to select the 
personnel of the Committees and take other steps in 
order to give rffect to the above resolution. 

COW SLAUGHTER AT MUTTRA 

This Session of the Hindu Maliasablia draws the 
attention of the Govt, of India to the fact that the 
cows and other animfils are being salnghtered at 
Muttra and other surrounding places witiiin the limits of 
the sacred region of Brijamadal in Contravention of the 
time honoured custom of respecting the sanctity 
of Brijamandal by altogether prohibiting animal 
slaughter therein. 

This Session further draws the attention of the 
Govt, of India to the fact tliat even Non-Hindu Kings 



218 


of India as well as the East India Company prohibited 
the slanghter of cows and other animals and that the 
East India Company and its successors have recog- 
nised this right of the Hindus and promised’ subse- 
quently to respect the Hindu sentiment in this respect. 

The Mahasabha therefore puts on record its empha- 
tic protest against the sacrilege of cow and animal 
slaughter in the very heart of Brijamandal at Muttra, 
the birth-place of Bhagwan Sri Krishna, one of the 
holiest and most sacred places to Hindus all over the 
world and requests the Government of India to take 
immediate steps to put a stop to the sacrilege, 

Tliis Session urges ui)on tlie Hindus all over India 
to carry on ceaseless agitation and propaganda until 
the sacred birth-place of Lord Krishna is saved from 
sacrilege. That, in case, the legitimate demand of the 
Hindus is not conceded by the end of December, 
1936, active steps in the nature of Satyagraha may be 
adopted by the Mahasabha. 

MALABAR AND KERALA CONVERSIONS 

This Session of the Hindu Mahasabha urges upon 
the Hindus in Malabar and Kerala to orgfinise them- 
selves with a view to counteract the conversion propa- 
ganda carried on by the Muslim and Christian Mission- 
aries and autliorises the Working Committee to adopt 
such merfns as they think fit to give effect to the 



219 


resolution and appeals to public to contribute liberally 
to the funds raised by the Working Committee for 
that purpose. 


19TH AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU MAHASABHA 

AHMEDABAD, DECEMBER 1937. 

PRESIDENT * SYT. SWAT ANTRA VIR V. D. 
SAVARKAR 


1?EM0VAL OF UNTOrCHABILITY 
Tlii.s Conference congratulates the Maharajas oi 
Kolhapur, Barocla, Travancore, Kashmir and Lathi 
states for having opened all th’e State temples to all 
Hindus irrespective of any distinction of class or caste 
and requests otlier Hindu Rulers to follow them. The 
Conference also congratulates such individual members 
of the Hindu Community who have also thrown open 
their temples to all classes of Hindu Community irres- 
pective of any distinction of class or caste. 

FEDERATION— PART I. 

In view of the fact : (a) that under the constitu- 
tion of Govt, of Ipdia Act of 1936, some elements of 



220 


Provincial Autonomy have been introduced and the 
Congress baa been actually working the Provincial 
Grovts. for the present, and (b) that Provincial Auto- 
nomy will not work with constitutional smoothness 
unless responsibility is introduced in the Central Govt, 
at least provided for under the Act, this Conference 
puts on record its deliberate opinion that inspite of the 
defective and unsatisfactory character of the Constitu- 
tion, the Hindus should utilize whatever powers are 
provided for under the Act in the interest of the evo- 
lution of Hindusthan as a united nation and urges 
upon the Govt, to expedite the introduction of the 
Federation. 


FEDERATION— PART IL 
The Hindu Mahasabha warns the Govt, and all 
those who may be concerned with it that, as the Maha- 
sabha has fundamental opposition to the so-called 
Communal Award and is determined to do all that lies 
in its power to do away with it as early as possible, the 
Mahasabha will not tolerate any attempt to extend 
the scope of the Award so as to apply also to the 
Indian States. 

NIZAM HYDERABAD AND BHOPAL 
(a) This Session condemns the murder of Veda- 
prakash of Nizam Hyderabad at the hands of Moslem 
hooligans and deplores that the Nizam Government 



221 


does Hot take adequate measxires for pfoteotion of its 
Hindu subjects. It also particularly condemns the 
persecution of Arya Samajists. This Session expresses 
its heart-felt sorrow for the maiiyr and conveys its 
eondolenoe to the bereaved family. 

(b) This Session condemns the callousness of Bhopal 
State which refused the release of the late Bhagwan 
Das Rathi even while he was on death bed and calls 
upon the Nawab to redress the manifold grievances 
under which the Hindu subjects of the State labour. 

REMOVAL OF BAN ON BOOKS 

This Conference puts on record its protest against 
the Bombay Government for not releasing the 
proscribed books written by Shree V. D. Savarkar 
and most of the books written by Sjt. S. M. 
Paranjpe. 


BENGAL 

This Session of the Hindu Mahasabha views with 
great indignation and unequiooally condemns the 
communal activities of the Bengal Go\'t. as evidenced 
by several proposed legislations and administrative 
measures as also by the speeches of the Premier, Mr. 
Fazlul Huq and calls upon the Hindus of Bengal to unite 
and organise themselves in defence of their political, 
economic and cultural rights. 



222 


ASSAM 

This Session of the Hindu Mahasabha condemns 
the Govt, policy of the unrestricted immigration into 
the Province of Assam, which is deliberately calculated 
to turn it into a Muslim majority province and calls 
upon the Hindus of Assam to resist this policy. 

HlNDIj CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS 

Tliis Se^^sion urges upon the Central and Provincial 
Governments to enact a law which may allow the 
accounts of Hindu Charitable Institutions to be inspect- 
ed by Committees of Hindu Sabhas and to allow 
reasonable amount of the funds to be utilised for the 
religious, social and economic welfare of the Hindus. 







EstabUsh-ed in 1008, 


In 1906 the Muslim League was founded in Dacca, 
Next year the first step in the introduction of Reforms 
in this country, known as Minto-Morley Reforms, was 
taken. The Punjab Hindus by that time had begun 
to note a change in the policy of the Government and 
to find that it was becoming clearly pro-Mohammedan. 
Lord Min to himself had advised the Muslim deputation 
to demand separate Communal respresentation in this 
country, A deputation under the leadership of Sir Aga 
Khan waited upon Lord Minto which Moulana Mohd. 
Ali called a ‘Command performance.’ The Jlindus 
of the Punjab found that the policy followed by the 
Congress was not the one which could do an3rthing for 
the protection of the Hindus, Almost alj the leading 
Hindus, belonging to different Hindu associations, met 
under the presidentship of Sir Protulchandra Chatter ji, 
a retired Judge of the Chief Court, Punjab and decided 
to organise a new movement for safe-guarding the 
Hindu interests nnder the name of the Punjab Hindu 
Sabha. It was in the yearsA9(08-’9. 

This movement was extended from Delhi to certain 



226 


parts of the U. P. Then the great War broke out and 
created a lull in the public life of the country. Mr. 
(now .Sir) Shadilal, Bar-at-Law, who had worked as 
the Secretary of the Sabha presided at the Annual Con- 
ference of Hindu Sabha held at Delhi. Rai Lai Chand, 
who had acted as a Chief Court Judge and was 
the moving spirit of the Punjab Hindu Sabha, died in 
1912. During the following years the Hindu Sabha 
therefore did not keep up much of its former activity. 
In 1921 a great Conference of the Hindu Sabha wag 
held at Muttra under the leadership of Pt. M. M. 
Malaviya with the clear object of supporting the Non- 
Co-operation Movement started by Mahatma Gandhi 
just as the Khilafat Conference had done it on behalf 
of the Muslims. But it did not do any more work. 

In 1922-28 the Hindus were confronted with a new 
communal struggle in the country. As a reaction to 
the movement of Non-co-operation and Khilafat a new 
era had started. There grew up a spontaneous desire 
almost everywhere among the Hindus to do something 
to awaken the Hindus in the face of a new danger. 
The Punjab Hindu Sabha bad continued its existence 
in Lahore but it had lost touch with the public and 
was confined to a very limited number. One of its 
rule was that its membership was not open to anybody 
and everybody. In Lahore a new association was 
formed under the name of Hindu Sangh with Bhree 



227 


Bhai Parmanandji as its President, to enlist Hiiio^us 
as its members with objects similar to those of the pre- 
sent Hindu Mahasabha. A few months after the 
Hindu leaders met in a Conference at Benares and an 
Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha with definite aims 
and rul^»s was organised. A meeting of the Hindus 
was held and it was unanimously resolved to amalga- 
mate the Sangh with the newly-started Mahasabha to 
work as its Provincial Centre in the Punjab. Shree 
Bhai Parmanandji was elected its first President. 

The enthusiasm for the Hindu cause lasted for three 
years or so. During this period branches of the Hin- 
du Sabha were organised in almost all the important 
towns of the Punjab, Soon a Provincial Conference 
was held at Lahore under the Presidentship of Mala- 
viyaji. It was a great success and showed a new 
awakening among the Punjab Hindus. Again Con- 
ferences were held at Amritsar, Kangra, Ambala, 
Rohtak and other places. At Amritsar it was presi- 
ded over by Lala Lajpat Rai, Bhai Parmanand, Raja 
Narindra Nath and Dr, Gokal Chand Namng by turns. 
At Kangra Pt. Din Dayal presided, at Ambala Dr. 
B. S. Moonje and at Rohtak Pt. Malaviyaji. Again 
the Punjab-Frontier-Sindh Conference was held at 
Lahore under the presidentship of Shree Bhai Parma- 
nandji. On the oocasi^ion of t)be Congress Session in 
a special Conference was held when Tatyasahib 



228 


N. 0. Kelkar presided. Taking Delhi as a. part of the 
Punjab the Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha held 
its Annual Sessinn in 1925 — 1926 under the president- 
ship of Raja Narindra Nath. Again the Mahasabha 
held its Annual Session at Lahore in 1936 when Jagad- 
guru Shree Shankaracharya (Dr. Kurtakoti) presided. 
On this occasion the Hindu youths held the Session of 
the 2nd All India Hindu Youth’s Conference under 
th« presidentship of Dr. Radhaknmud Mukerjee while 
Puj. Diwan Chand Sharma acted as Chairman of the 
Reception Committee. 

It is worth mentioning here that Shree Bhai 
Parmaiiandji in the capaciay of the Punjab Hindu 
leader had to go and preside over the U. P. 
Provincial Hindu Conference at Lucknow, over the 
two Bihar Provincial Conferences held at Bhagal 
pore and Patna, over the three Sind Provincial 
Conferences held at Karachi and Sukkur and over the 
l^engal Provincial Conference held at Calcutta. Be- 
sides these he presided over the Akhi) Bharatiya 
Hindu Mahasabha Session at Ajmere in 1933 after 
which he made a tour of all the provinces of India, 
such as, the IT. P.. Bihar, Bengal, Madras, the 0. P., 
Maharashtra, Bombay, and Gujarat. He hid also tour- 
ed in Burma and Assam a little earlier, 

T^h© work of the Punjab Hindu Sabha can be 
classified under three different heads. Apart from 



229 


doing ptopananda which was not very efficient the 
Punjab Hindu Sabha had to look to the troubles of 
the Hindus for which frequent occasions arose The 
most important of these was an appeal for the relief to 
be given to nearly five thousand refugees from Kohat at 
Rawalpindi and to maintain them for about ten months. 
About Rs. One Lac and a half were collected and 
spent on thoso helpless men, women and children who 
had been driven from Kohat quite penniless. Quite a 
similar and muctmore severe calamity fell upon the 
Hindus of Mirpur, a district in Jammu, when the 
Moslems of Kashmir, instigated and supported by the 
Muslims of the Punjab, practically revolted against the 
Maharaja’s Government. Some fifteen thousand Hindus 
left their homes in order to save their lives from the 
loot and arson at the hands of their »Mn slim neighbours. 
While the Hindu Sabha gave relief to the sufferers 
other associations also did their part. Again the 
Muslims at Sikandarabad attacked the Hindus and 
burnt their houses and shops. In Multan the Hindus 
were assaulted twice or thrice and some Hindus were 
also murdered. Prom both the places appeals were made 
to the Hindu Mahasabha for help and all the necessary 
measures were taken by the Punjab Hindu Sabha to 
help them in their troubles. At Rawalpindi the 
Hindu mn-rket was put on fire by Muslims. The 
Punjab Hindu Sabha then helped the Hindus there. 



2B0 


Similarly when the Hindus in the states like 
Bahawalpur, Loharu, Malerkotla and Kapurthala 
were put to trouble the Punjab Hindu Sabha did all 
that was in its power to help them. 

The second part of the Sabha’s work is in connec- 
tion with the Temple of Bir Bairagi. In the city of 
Lahore there are numerous small wrestling Akharas 
where Hindus arrange tournaments in which young 
wrestlers take part. But they wanted to have some 
place far away fi’Am the city w’here thousands of peo- 
ple interested in the tournaments could go on foot or in 
tongas. The Punjab Hindu Sabha got a site outside 
the city and spent aboi|t Rupees fifteen thousand on 
the construction of a theatre there where tournaments 
have been now held for the last thirteen years. 
In this theatre was also constructed a Temple to 
commemorate the Bir Bairagi Bay, the first hero 
of the modem Punjab. It was this great man who 
after the retirement of Guru Govind Singh came to 
the Punjab and conquered almost the whole of it. 
But the Moghul Emperor, Farrukh Sayyar, succeeded 
in creating a division among his followers, captur- 
ed him along with seven hundred soldiers by 
treachery and took all of them to Delhi where they 
were all butchered. This was Bir Bairagi’s unparallel- 
ed example of true martyrdom. The Sikh writers 
relate almost all these facts but mention the great 



m 


hero in such a disparaging language that he was 
practically forgotten by the Hindus. The Punjab 
Hindu Sabha took it on itself to revive his memory 
and through him to infuse a new life among the 
Hindus. All this work was practically done by the 
late Lala Ram Nath Kapur, Punjab Hindu Sabha 
worker, whose death, three years’ ago, has been a 
great loss to the Hindus and their movement. 

The third part of the work is the establishment of 
the Industrial Ashram situated in the building of the 
Punjab Hindu Sabha itself. This Ashram has been in 
existence for the last seven years and has trained more 
than two hundred young men in different handicrafts 
and industries. Its origin is to the special cir- 
cumstances of widespread unemployment among Hindu 
young men. The Punjab Hindu Sabha had to meet 
a great difficulty in this connection. The Hindu young 
men who had passed the Matriculation Examina- 
tion and had even read up to the Intermediate 
Examination came to the Punjab Hindu Sabha 
and appealed for help. Taking the ever-increasing 
problem of unemployment into consideration, the 
Punjab Hindu Sabha thought over the matter and 
decided upon a new plan. It advised them to select 
some handicraft which could become a means of living 
for them and decided that for the time they were learn- 
ing that handicrafts as apprentices with some master 



2b2 


craftsmen it would make arrangements for thdr fre^ 
board and lodging. As there was a large number of 
applicants a regular Ashram was started by the Sabha. 
In the beginning the uumbm: rose upto sixty and the 
Punjab Hindu Sabha had to spend about Rupees two 
hundred and fifty on their food alone. Tlie number has 
been, however, sradually decreasing. At present there 
are more than twenty in-mates living in the Ashram and 
learning some kind of industry and handicraft. The 
maintenance of this Ashram has been^diie first to the 
munificence of R. B. Lala Sewak Ram who has been 
the President of the Punjab Hindu Sabha for more 
than six years and who has donated Rupees one hund- 
red every month towards the Ashram and secondly to 
the charity of Dr. Sir Gokal Chand Narang who 
subscribes Rupees fifty a month. The Ashram has been 
managed by a committee of which Prof. Diwan Chand 
Sharma has been the president for a number of years. 

It is due to ceaseless ^and sincere efforts of Bhai 
Parmanandaji who is the soul of the Hindu Sabha 
Movement in the Punjab, that it now possesses a 
property worth Rs. Two Lacs, the annual inooipe 
which is about Rs. aOOO/-. This is spent fpr 
organiasation purposes. 

Dr, Sir Gokal Chand Narang is at present the Pre- 
sideht ^d Prof. Diwan Chand Shanm the General 
'Seet^tary t>f the ProvinmSl Hindu Sabha. 



DELHI 


Established in 19 J 8. 


Delhj is one of the smallest Provincial Units of 
Hindusthan, Butx)n account of its importance as the 
ancient and present Capital of Hindusthan its position 
is unique and significant. So also the Provincial 
Delhi Hindu Sabha and its activities are generally 
reflected mostly through the activities of the All 
India Hindu Mahasablia, the Head Office of which is 
located in New Delhi. 

The Delhi Provincial Hindu Sabha was established 
in 1918, when the 5th Session of the All India Hindu 
Mahasabha which met under the Presidentship of 
Raja Sir Rampal Singh, K. C. I. E., of Oudh was 
invited to Delhi. But the Provincial Hindu Sabha 
came into prominence only when in 1926 the late Lala 
Lajpat Rai during the tenure of his Presidentship 
transferred the Head Office of the Hindu Mahasabha 
from Benares to Delhi. 

The Provincial Hindu Sabha organised the 9th 
Session of the Hindu Mahasabha which took place in 



234 


Delhi in 1926 under the Presidentship of Raja Narindra 
Nath. This Session was a momentous one. Rai Kidar 
Nath, the founder of Ramjas Colleges and Schools in 
Delhi was the Chairman of the Reception Committee. 

The Delhi Provincial Hindu Sabha has all along 
been regarded as the mouth-piece of the Hindus of 
Delhi. In the General Elections of the Central Assemb- 
ly held here in 1926, Mr. Asaf Ali, the present Congress 
Member of the Central Assembly was defeated by the 
Hindu Sabha candidate, Mr. Rang Behari Lai, who was 
then only a young advocate. He made himself popular 
by working for the 9th Annual Session of the Hindu 
Mahasabha as the General Secretary of its Reception 
Committee and in the Riot cases of 1924. 

In 1932, the Delhi Provincial Hindu Sabha again 
invited the 15th Session of the Hindu Mahasabha 
which took place under the Presidentship of Syt. N. C. 
Kelkar. Lala Shiva Narain (Senior), Advocate, Delhi 
was the Chairman of the Reception Committee. 

The strong position of the Delhi Provincial Hindu 
Sabha was slightly weakened in 1932 when the 
General Elections of the Central Assembly took place. 
Pt. Madan Mohan Malaviya who founded the Congress 
Nationalist Party entered into some compromise with 
the Congress leaders regarding the election of the 
Delhi Province. Owing to his pressure, the local 
Nationalist Party candidate, Syt. Shiva Narain with- 



235 


drew on the approach of Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel 
and Mr. Bhula Bhai Desai and this resulted in an easy 
walk-over for Mr. Asaf Ali who is at present represent- 
ing the Delhi Province in the Central Assembly. 

Once again the Delhi Hindus mustered strong 
under the banner of Hindu Sabha and in the local 
Municipal Elections of 1936, nine candidates who 
signed the Hindu Sabha pledge came out successful 
from 12 Hindu wards. In 1933, the Sabha did relief 
work during the flood. In the year 1938, when Veer 
V.D. Savarkar, the President of the Hindu Mahasabha 
came to the Capital City for the first time after his re- 
lease, he was warmly welcomed and an unprecedented 
procession was taken out in his honour. 

For the last few months, an agitation is going on in 
Delhi against the alleged forcible occupation of Shiva 
Mandir by the police. This has once again brought the 
Hindus on a common platform in asserting themselves 
for protecting their religious rights. The Hindu Sabha 
is taking its proper share in the agitation and it can 
be said without exaggeration that it will strengthen 
the Provincial Hindu Sahha very much. 

R. B. Harishchandra Advocate is at present the 
President of the Provincial Hindu Sabha. 



THE UHITEP FR0V6HCES 


Established in 1919. 


The Montague-Clielmsford Reforms created a new 
political urge amongst the Indian people. Accord- 
ingly, to safeguard the political and constitutional 
rights and to further the social advancement of Hindus, 
the Hindu Sabha was established and a Provincial 
Hindu Sabha was organised in these Provinces in 1919. 

From 1919 to the year 1934, the U. P. Provincial 
Hindu Sabha continued to work but not very acti- 
vely. But with the discussions at the Round Table 
Conference regarding the rights of Hindus and the 
move of interested parties to severe the so-called 
untouchables from the Hindu fold a new awakening 
was created amongst the Hindus of India as a whole. 
These developments and the passing of the Govern- 
ment of India Act, 1935 gave a fresh impetus to the 
consolidation and re-organisation of the Hindu Sabha 
work in these Provinces. 

In March 1934, elections of the Provincial Hindu 
Sabha were held. Raja Burga Narain Singh of Tirwa 
was elected President and Pt. Gauri Shankar Misra, 



237 


the Working President. In the following year in Feb- 
ruary 1935, Pt. Gauri Shankar Misra was elected 
President and Raja Durga Narain Singh was elected 
as one of the Vice-Presidents, Pt. l^isra, however, 
subsequently resigned and the other elected Office- 
bearers did not function. The Office-bearers elected 
during 1934 thus continued in office. 

At this stage in the United Provinces, the 
Nationalist Agriculturists Party was organised by a 
group of Taluqdars, Zamindars and persons who had 
vested interests to fight out the elections and to capture 
the political power in the Provinces. The Raja Sahib of 
Tirwa, the then President of the Provincial Hindu Sabha 
was reported to have joined hands with the Nawab 
Sahib of Chhatari to form a Coalition Ministry in the 
Provinces, of which the Nawab Sahib of Chhatari was to 
be the Prime Minister. The Raja Sahib of Tirwa was 
the Secretary of the Nationalist Agriculturists Party. 
The association of the President of the Provincial 
Hindu Sabha, representing 86 per cent of the total po- 
pulation of the Provinces, in a subordinate position, was 
highly resented by the Hindu public of these Provinces. 
The publication of the news in the press, which went un- 
contradicted, that the Raja Sahib of Tirwa had entered 
into a paqt with the Nawab Sahib of Chhatari to form a 
Coalition Ministry in U. P., in which th^ Raja Sahib was 
going to be a Hindu Minister, further added fuel to 



238 


the fire. A vote of no-confidence was moved against 
the Raja Sahib of Tirwa and carried. The matter was 
represented to the Working Committee of the All India 
Hindu Mahasabha where the no-confidence vote against 
the Raja Sahib of Tirwa ivas upheld. Duidng the 
year 1936, fresh elections were held and Raja Sir 
Rampal Singh was elected President and R. B. Vik- 
ramajit Singh, Working President. As Raja Sir 
Rampal Singh had during this period been keeping 
indifferent health, the entire responsibility and burden 
of conducting the organisation of the Provincial Hindu 
Sabha fell on the shoulders of the Working President. 
It was during this period that district and towm Hindu 
Sabhas were organised throughout the Proyinces and 
substantial and useful wnrk was attended to. It 
was probably for the first time in the history of the 
Hindu Sabhas of these Provinces that in the year 
1930, a Deputation of influential Hindus led by R. B. 
Vikrama-jit Singh, M. B. E., waited upon His Ex- 
cellency, the Grovernor of the United Provinces. The 
Deputationists drew His Excellency’s attention to the 
inadequate and unsatisfactory representation of Hindus 
ill various services of the Government. Stress was 
mainly laid upon the granting of a proportionate 
representation to the Hindus based on the population 
basis in the Government services. It was pointed 
out that in tlie Police and various other services the 



number of Moslems was proportionately much higher 
than what their population justified. A detailed 
Memorandum giving facts and figures was also sub- 
mitted. Elis Excellency, the Governor gave the Depu- 
tationists a patient hearing and assured that their 
re])resentation would receive his personal and favour- 
able consideration. 

During these years 48 branches of the Provincial 
Hindu Sabha representing almost all districts of these 
Provinces have been organised. It is through these 
branches that the Central Sabha keeps itself informed 
of all events likely to affect the rights and interests 
of the Hindus. Local organisations have been doing 
useful work in protecting the life and property of 
those who stand in need of the same. The Provincial » 
Hindu Sabha has, since 1936, been sending }‘egular 
contingent of delegates to the Annual Session of 
the Hindu Sabha. The U. P. Provincial Hindu Sablia 
holds a prominent place in the All India Hindu* Sabha. 
A number of its prominent workers are associated 
with the main organisation of the All India Hindu 
Mahaaabha. 

During the last Elections, the Provincial Hindu 
Sabha also did its best to fight for tlietHindus. It set 
up a Parliamentary Board and assisted almost 30 
candidates to fight out the Elections on the Hindu 
Sabha ticket. Unfortunately, owing to divisions and 



240 


dissensions, none of the Hindu Sabha candidate could be 
got elected. Most of the influential Hindus, including 
the Baja Sahib of Tirwa, the past President of the 
Hindu Sabha, fought their elections on other than 
Hindu Sabha ticket. Yet, it is gratifying to state that 
the Sabha did its duty, though it could not control 
the results. 

Darina: these years amongst those who have been 
financially and otherwise supporting the Provincial 
Hindu Sabha, special mention needs be made of E. B. 
Vikramajit Singh who has been the life and soul of 
the Organisation, Dr. Sir J. P. Srivastava, Munshi Ram 
Kumar Bhargava, Rani Phul Kumari Sahiba of 
Sherkot, Kr. Surendra Pratap Sahi, R. B. Rameshwar 
Prasad Bagla, Lala Chhanga Mai and Raja Bahadur 
Bishwanath Singh Sahib of Tiloi. 

, During the year 1938 when the President of the All 
India Hindu Mahasabha, Br. V. D. Savarkar visited the 
United Provinces, grand receptions were organised in 
his honour at Lucknow, Cawnpore and Agra. 

Raja Bahadur Bishwanath Singh of Tiloi is at pre- 
sent the President, R. B. Vikramajit Singh, M. B. E., 
the Working President and Shri Satya Narain Pande 
the General Secretary of the Provincial Hindu Sabha. 



EstaVjlislied in 1922. 


The Hindu Sabha movement in Bihar began as early 
as the year 1922. Immediately after the Malabar and 
Multan roits, a Sj)ecial Session of the Hindu Mahasabha 
was held at Gaya with Pandit Malaviya as President 
and B. Rajendra Prasad as Chairman of the Reception 
Committee. It was highly successful. Malaviyajee pro- 
mised at the Session to hold the next Annual Session 
at Benares with full preparations. In the meantime 
the Shuddhi movement with Swami Shraddhanandjee 
at its head was in full swing and the Muslim opposi- 
tion to it made the movement all the more vigorous 
and popular and inspired zeal among the Hindus for 
the Hindu Sabha Session at Benares for which Swami 
Shraddhanandjee undertook a country-wide tour. 

Thus the work of the Bihar Provincial Hindu Sabha 
began systematically in the province. A District Con- 
ference was held at Motihari along with the Provincial 
political conference and was a very great success. Orga- 
nisation work began to be carried on in different parts 
of the province. The first Bihar Provincial Hindu 
Conference was held at Darbhanga under the presi- 
dentship of Jagat Guru Swami Blnirii Krislian Tirilia 



242 


jee who had been recently released from the Hazari- 
bagh Central Jail. The Session was a complete success, 
and after the Session Shankracharyajee and Babu 
Jagatnarain Lai made a prolonged tour throughout the 
Province. The Hindu Sabha Movement thus received a 
great impetus in the Proviuce and Hindu Sabhas were 
established in large numbers. A band of wholetime 
workers for almost every district was appointed in the 
Province and in each of the districts like Palamun and 
Pumea, etc. from 50 to 100 Sabha*s were established. 
A special Session of the Bihar Provincial Hindu Con- 
ference was held at Sonepur Mela under the president- 
ship of Swami Sayanandjee of Bharat Dharma Maha- 
mandal. The next Session of the Bihar Provincial 
Hindu Conference was held at Miizaffarpur under the 
presidentship of Punjab Kesari, Lala Lajpat Raiji in 
1925, amid scenes of unparallel enthusiasm. 

The third Session was held at Chapra in 1926 under 
the presidentship of Pandit Malaviyaji amid a large 
and distinguished gathering and was a tremendous 
success. The 4th Session of the Bihar Provincial 
Hindu Conference was held at Bhagalpur in 1927 un- 
der the presidentship of Shri Bhai Parmanandji and 
was a great success. The 5th Session of the Bihar 
Provincial Hindu Conference was held most success- 
fully at Purnea under the presidentship of Shriman 
Dr. B. S. Moonjee in 1929. 



243 


The fcth Session of the Bihar Provincial Hindu Con- 
ference was held at Patna in Patna City under the 
presidentship of Shri Bhai Parmanandji. 

The 7th Session of the Biliar Provincial Hindu 
Conference was held at Patna in the Hindu Sabha 
Building, Bankipore under the presidentship of Syt. 
Kumar Ganganand Singhji M. A-, M. L. C. 

The Removal of Untouchability Conferences, Suddhi 
Conferences and-other conference were also 1 eld along 
with these conferences. Several Hindu Orphanages 
and Hindu Widows’ Homes were established at Patna, 
Monghyr, Bhagalpur, Gaya, Katihar, Kanchi and 
other places in the wake of the Hindu Sabha Move- 
ment in this province and thousands of widows and 
orphans have been protected since then and a large 
number of cases were fought for rescuing and protect- 
ing widows and orphans from time to time. 

The Bihar Provincial Hindu Sabha has fought 
many a battle from time to time in political, social 
and religious fields for the protection of the rights 
and interests of the Hindus in these spheres. 

During the great earthquake in Bihar, the Hiudu 
Sabha Bihar Relief Committee rendered great service 
both to human life and shelterless cows at Patna, 
Monghyr, Muzaffarpur, Darbhanga, etc. An important 
department of the Bihar Provincial Hindu Sabha is the 



‘2U 


Bihar Gosewa Mandal which protects old cows at the 
great -Son epnr fair and other fairs from the hands of 
the butchers, and take old cows from the Goshalas and 
settle them in the large pasture lands placed at its 
disposal by Brimaii Prince Pam Baja Rahib, Pro- 
prietor of Ram Nagar Paj and the son-in-law of 
Maharaja Nepal. 

The Shuddhi and Untouchable departments of the 
Bihar Provincial Hindu Sabha w^ere also working 
actively for several years in various parts of the 
Province. Deshratna B. Pajendra Prasadjee and the 
Hoivble Babu Krishna Singh, the present Prime 
Minister of Bihar, were also associated with this 
movement till the period when they parted company 
on account of the conflict between the Hindusabha 
and the Congress at the Assembly elections. 

The work for the protection of the aboriginal Hindu 
tribes was carried on in different parts of Chhotanag- 
pur and Ranclii, etc. till the Sharddhanand Mission 
was established here on behalf of the All India 
Shraddhanand Mission. 

Rhri Kumar Ganganand Singh of Darbhanga is 
at present the President and Pandit Bharat Misra the 
General Secretary of the Provincial Hindu Sabha. 



THE CENTRA.L PROVINCES 

( MAH AR ATT! ) 


EstablishcMl in 1928. 


The Hindu Sa-bba was started at Naopur for the fir^st 
time in November 192b. Tn those da.ys when there was 
a loud talk of Hindu-Muslim Unity, a dispute arose 
over the question of music before mosques in a corner 
of Nagpur iji connection with Ganesli procession. 
Soon after a Hindu-Muslim clash occurred in Koshti- 
pura, which o])ened tlie eyes of tlie Hindus. They 
met together in Tulsi Bagh and a representative Hindu 
Sablia was formed, which undertook a triple task to 
perform. On one hand the Sablia made arrangements 
to light out the cases for the Hindus in law courts and 
on the other, it carried on negotiations with the Mus- 
lim leaders with a view to affect an honourable compro- 
mise; while thirdly, the Sabha tried to organise tlie 
Hindu Community internally to be prepared to face 
any eventualit 3 ^ 

In 1927 terrible Hindu-Muslim riots broke out 
which were severe at Arvi, in Wardha District. 
Twenty-four Hindus were prosecuted as a result of the 



246 


riots. The Hindu Sabha promptly arranged for their 
defence. Then, for the first time the C. P. and Berar 
Provincial Hindu Conference was held at Nagpur in 
1927. The late Sir Sankaran Nair presided. This 
Session was a grand success. 

After the death of Shrimant Raja Laxmanrao 
Bhonsala, Shrimant Madhorao Chitnis was elected his 
successor. Mr. Chitnis, with his own expenses, 
started the Hindu Sabha Office. Later on six meetings 
of the workers of the Sabha were called and one of 
the important resolutions passed was that of collecting 
funds to pay the fines of those who were sentenced to 
that effect as a result of the 1927 riots. Efforts were 
also made for the release of those still undergoing 
imprisonment. 

Shrimant Raja Laxmanrao, Di\ B. S. Moonje, etc. 
founded the Shraddhanand Anathalaya in 1927. Later 
on for its maintenance the Nagpur Hindu Sablia arranged 
to get interest on a fixed reserve of Rs. 12000/- which 
was registered. Shrimant Daji Saheb Buti handed 
over a huge building for the use of the Anathalaya. 
The institution is run solely with the help of the Hindu 
Sabha workers. 

The Anath Vidyarthi Griha was started by Sir 
Govindrao Cholkar. For the last fifteen years it is 
working well under the patronage of Dr. Gopalrao 
Deshmukh. Right from Brahmins to Harijans, more 



247 


than 250 boys are now enjoying the shelter of the 
Griha. Before a few years the institution constructed 
a building of its own for hostel and school purposes. 
The High School started by ths Griha is recognised 
by tlie Government. The Griha is run mostly with 
the help of the workers of the Hindu Sabha. 

Some enthusiastic youths of Nagpur including Mr. 
H N. Gokhale, the Joint Secretary of the Marathi C. P. 
Hindu Sabha have started Arya Yuvak Sangha to 
push on the Shuddhi Movement. This institution also 
has its various branches in Buldi and the City. 

Mr. Machwe who is incliarge of the Shuddhi Vibhag 
of the Hindu Sabha has started Vidhwa A^ivah Mandal. 
Another Mandal run by Mr. Paranjpe is also work- 
ing well. 

The Hindu Girls’ High School has now developed into 
a flourishing High School and the starting of a College 
is being contemplated. For fifteen years continuously 
Dr. Paranjpe, A^ice-President of the Hindu Sabha, was 
the Chairman of the School Committee. 

The C. P. Hindu Sabha Election Board was establish- 
ed in 1937 to contest the elections for the Provincial 
Legislative Assembly. From C. P., Marathi and 
Hindi, the Board set up about 35 candidates. xAn 
election manifesto was issued and propaganda was 
done through the press and platform. But as all this 



248 


had to be done within the sliort pmod of a month the 
Board could not secure satisfactory results. 

The Hindu Sabha fully supported the Hindu cause in 
Patanswangi trouble. The place is about 16 miles 
from Nagpur. Here the trouble as regards the right 
of Hindus to play music before mosques at certain 
times was created by the Mohamedans. Fifteen 
Hindus were prosecuted under section 107 but the 
struggle continued undauntedly. At last on 27th 
August, the Grovernment was compelled to withdraw 
the police and allow a huge procession of the Hindus 
to pass before the mosque, music being played unceas- 
ingly. Afterv/ards the Deputy Commissioner of 
Nagpur issued an order admitting the right of the 
Hindus to take their procession by any route and at 
any time, playing music continuously. 

Several District, Tahsil, Nagar, Village or Circle 
branches of the Provincial Hindu Sabha have been 
started by doing a lot of propaganda work. 

Shrimant M. G, Cliitnavis, M. L, A. is at present 
the President and Shri Jaganuath Prasad Verrna is the 
General Secretary of the Provincial Hindu Sabha. 



©OMBA\Y 


I^^tablished in 1924. 


The Bombay Provincial Hindu Sa])ha was organised 
by Raja Narain Pitty in 1924. The first Provincial 
Conference was lield in Bombay in the same year and 
was presided over by Lala Lajpat Rai. Mr. R, 
Jaykar was elected as the President of the Provincial 
Hindu Sabha, 

The Provincial Hindu Sabha organised another 
Conference in 1928 which was presided over by Mr, 
L. B. Bhopatkar of Poona. The Sabha has been carry- 
ing out the objects of the All India Hindu Mahasabha. 
It has rendered great assistance to the Shrddhanand 
Anath Melila Ashram started by the Hindu Women 
Rescue Home Societ3^ The report of the Ashram 
shows a marvellous service done by the Hindu Sabha 
for preservation of a large number of Hindu women 
and children. 

Another Provincial Conference took place in Bom- 
bay in 1934 under the presidentship of l)i\ B> S. 
Moonje, 



The Bombay Provincial Hindu Sliabha possessed 
a number of ward and suburban Hindu Sabhas and the 
whole of Bombay constituted a se])arate Provincial 
branch. All these branches were functioning well at) 
a time but later on deterioration set in at the Centre 
and in some of the branches. In the meanwhile Muslim 
aggression began to assume more and more menacing 
and systematic aspect in Bombay. Once again tlie 
growing aggression and inroads of the Muslims on the 
majority community helped the Hindus to de/elop 
Hindu consciousness. 

The young representatives of the Badar Hindu 
Sabha, who had gone to Poona to attend the Session of 
the Hindu Mahasabha, returned fired with new en- 
thusiasm and inspiration and at once yoked themselves 
to the Mahasabha work. Encouraged by the pillars of 
the Hindu cause like Dr. Purandarey and guided by Dr. 
Savarkar, the Hindu Sabha Movement soon gathered 
force in the Dadar area. Hundreds of members were 
enrolled and an elaborate line of work was chalked out. 
The following are some of the im]x>rtant items *. — ■ 

(1) There used to be the moiioply of Mohamedan 
Pinjaris. It was impossible to find out Hindu Pinjaris 
in Bombay. Young and promising Hindus were train- 
ed, who readily picked up tliis line and very soon the 
Sabha was in a position to supply Hindu Pinjaris not 
only for Bombay but for the Mofussil also. 



251 


(*i) The Dadar Hindu Sabha revived the collective 
mass pi'ayer system among the Hindus, which was 
almost extinct for a pretty long time. 

(3) The Dadar Hindu Sabha was successful in creat- 
ing an inithative among the Hindus to patronise Hindu 
shopkeepers and hawkers in preference to those of 
other communities. 

(4) The Sabha created an awakening among the 
Hindu public by arranging lectures and sermons of 
Shri Shankaracliarya Dr. Kurtakoti, Shri Sant Pancli- 
legaonkar Maharaj, Dharmavir Dr. Moouje and other 
Hindu leaders of note. 

(5) The Hindu Sablva arranged a number of Katha- 
Saptabas (weeks) with a view to impress on the Hindu 
public the imperative need of Hindu Sangathaii and 
the proper means of achieving the same. 

(6) A big function w’as hold in honour of Shri 
Kashatra J^^gat Guru and strong support was lent to 
the Raja Bill. 

(7) A mass representation with thousands of 
signatures was sent to the Govt, demanding immediate 
release of Swatantrya Vir Savarkar. 

(8) The Silver Jubilee of His Majesty, the King of 
Nepal, the only independent Sovereign Hindu State, 
was celebrated with great eclat. 



252 


(9) Mischievous acts of the Faqir of Tppi were 
strongly condemned by the Sabha. 

(10) Active support was lent to the Sonya Maruti 
Satyagraha at Poona by sending volunteers and ofRee- 
bearers to participate in it. Dr. SaAmrkar was arrested 
and sentenced in this connection. 

(IL) The B^'Culla Maruti Affair. The Sabha took 
leading part in organising a united Hindu front to 
fight out the just cause of the Hindus against Muslims. 
A petition with 50,000 signatures was forwarded to the 
Govt, out of which Dadar alone secured 10,000 sig- 
natures within three days. 

(12) This affair caused the Hindu-Muslim riots of 
193G. Immediately’' a representative meeting of the 
prominent Hindu citizens was called and the Hindu 
Defence Committee ( Hindu Sanrakshak Mandal ) was 
formed to give relief to the Hindu sufferers. Hindu 
force were combined and their defensive power was 
demonstrated by successfuilj' combating Muslim on- 
slaughts. 

(13) Notable service was rendered by the volun- 
teers of the Sabha. Among other things, the posting 
of volunteers at the city and suburban railway stations 
to warn, guide and protect the passengers from 
outside stations deserves mention. Thus the pro- 
longed fight was kept up and carried on for three 



253 


months and then brought to a successful termination. 
The Sabha Mandap of the Byculla Maruti was 
completed, the ‘Vastu Shanti’ ceremony was performed 
with full religious pomp and the Muslim ‘goondaism’ 
was completely crushed. Peace was again restored 
in Bombay. 

(14) The Sabha took great pains to increase the 
members of the Hindu Mahasabha by thousands. 
Twenty-fivm hundred members were enrolled within one 
month. Naturally to-day Da dar has become a Hindu 
strong-hold in Bombay, the credit for wliich goes to the 
Sangathanist Hindu leaders, selfless workers, volunteers 
and the Sangathan-loving Hindu public of Dadar. 

Shri Seth L. R. Tairsee is at jiresent the President 
and Shri M. N. Talpade Advacate, Dr. Udgaonkar and 
Pandit Vijaya Shankarji are the Secretaries of the 
Provincial Hindu Sabha. 



Established in 1924. 


Ill 1924 on the lOtli of January a branch of the 
Hindu Mahasabha was opened at Poona. Since its 
inception the Poona Branch has been gatheriiify 
strength and influence. So far more than sixty 
branches have been started all over Maharashtra. To 
give impetus to the work already begun by tlie l^oona 
Branch, a tour programme of Dr. B. S. Moonje was 
arranged in 1927. The dignified personal it}’', and 
thundering declarations of Dr. Moonje made tlie whole 
atmosphere in Maharashtra vibratiiii? with Hindutva. 
People were roused from their sluinliers. Dr. Moonje 
visited in liis tours Poona, Satara, Nagar, Bulgaum, 
Nasik, Sholapur and other principal and notable cities 
and towns and also toured over the Southern Maratha 
States. 

In 1933 Bhai Parmanand and Dr. Moonje with Mr. 
R. G. Bhide and li. S. Rajawade and in 1935 Messrs. 
R. G. Bhide and R. S. Rajawade went on lectui'ing 
tours and carried the message of the Mahasabha to 
every corner of Maharashtra. The Session of the All 



India Hindu Mahasabha was lield in Poona in 19B5 
wliich was a uiiiqu(‘ and grand success* The Session 
lielped to remove perverse ideas of some sceptics 
about the aims and ideals of the Hindu Mahasabha* 
Maliaraslitra lias since then risen up to share its quota 
in the All India Movement of the Hindu Mahasabha. 

Though the branch of ihe All India Hindu Maha- 
sabha was opened at Poona in Pd24, Maharashtra was 
practically doing the Avork of the Sablia from 1920. 
The 1st Maharashtra Hindu Dharma Conference was 
held in 1920 at Nasik under the ])residentship of His 
Holiness Shri Shankaracharya, Dr. Kurtkoti. Uptil now 
seven Provincial Conferences were held; the last one 
was held at Kolhapur in 1937 under the presidentship 
of Dr. B. S Moonje. 

Maharashtra has done a])preciablo work in the field 
of Shuddhi. In the first three years of the establish- 
ment of the Poona Branch more than 100 converts 
were again brouglit back into the Hindufold. The 
Masurashrama is the pioneer in this field and it has 
rendered splendid work. Its Shuddhi work in Goa is 
above estimation. About 6000 Gavadas were recon- 
verted ‘en masse’. The Dharma Samrakshaka Sangh of 
West Khandesh is also performing feats in this work. 
Its propaganda and movements among the Bhills 
in Satpuda hills have evoked admiration from all. The 
Bhills are taught to lead pure and sirnjdc life. They 



256 


were completely addicted to drink; but by the system- 
atic propaganda by Eajaram Maharaj, head of the 
Sangh, they are almost cured of that evil. As the 
whole community has now become conscious and self- 
asserting the mischievous activities of the Muslim 
propagandists do not make effect on their minds* 
H. H. Shri Kshatra Jagadguru Maharaj of Kolhapur 
is doing very splendid work in this field. 

Besides tours and lectures, the Maharashtra Hindu 
Sabha is publishing literature on the work and pro- 
gramme of the Hindu Mahasabha. Such publications 
prove useful to make every Hindu self-conscious and 
intelligent and to answer the anti-propaganda of 
co-religionists and anti-religionists. Its first publica- 
tion was a booklet written by Mr. I). N. Shikhare on 
Hlinduisin — the Supreme Eeligion’. It vividly des- 
cribed tlie greatness of Hindu Dharma by comparing 
it with the other world religions. The Sabha publish- 
ed in 19*^5 a book ‘Hindu Samaj Darshan’ edited by 
Mr. L. B, Bhopatkar. Its latest publication is a 
pamphlet — ‘Hindu Mahasabha, the only National Body’ 
written by Mr. E. Q-. Bhide, the General Secretary of 
the All India Hindu Mahasabha. 

As is proverbially known, Maharashtra is a poor 
tract of land. Big sums over crores may not be 
collected; biit still Maharashtra does not lag behind 
ill materially contributing to the nation-building 



mi 


activities and to natioiial movements. The Maharashtra . 
Hindu Sabha donated Rs. 1500/- to the Kashmir Relief 
Fund, Rs. 6500/- to the Bihar Relief Fund and collect- 
ed about Rs. 12oOO for the Annual Session of the All 
India Hindu Mahasabha which met at Poona in 1935. 
Quite recently Rs. 4000/- were collected to help the 
Hindu sufferers in Hyderabad State. 

The Sonya Maruti Satyagraha in Poona started 
under the auspices of the Hindu Sabha was unique from 
many points of view. The most important and 
notable aspect of that Satyagraha was that it was for 
the first time in the living memory of Hindus that the 
Hindus as Hindus launched a movement of Satyagraha 
in defence of their religious rights — the rights of 
worship and playing of music. The Hindus without 
any distinction of caste or creed rallied round and 
offered Satyagraha, Thousands of Hindus of all ranks 
participated in the movement. The Maharashtra 
Hindu. Sabha with the support of the Varnashram 
Swarajy^, Sangh and the Democratic Swarajya Party 
systematically carried on the movement. The Satya- 
graha movement spelled advantageous to the Hindus 
in the work of Sanghatan. 

The condition of Hindus in the Hyderabad State 
is worsened to the limit. The people in the State are 
deprived evep of the elementary rights of citizenship. 
Liberty of speech, association, meeting, etc. is denied 



to theai. Sordte^vhete this depression most be checked 
ahd counteracted ahd ^th this vieTt alone the people 
In and bdtSide the State finally decided to start' the 
rnovemeht bf Satyagrafia against the tyranny and 
despbtiStn of the Niz»m. The Hindutt-a Nishta 
Satyag^aha Mandal vras established in Poona nnder 
the presidentship of Mr. G. V- KCtkar^ It was 
arranged to send volunteers by batches in the terri- 
tories of the Nraam to offer Satyagraha. The Hindus 
ai-e prepared to conduct the fight till their demands 
are satisfactorily fulfilled. Maharashtra with greater 
aifinities has exposed the cause of Hyderabad Hindus 
and is supporting the struggle with men, money and 
kind. The Maharashtra Hindu Babha has suffiriently 
financed the tnovenietit. 

*!rhe Maharashtra Hihdn Sahha is thus endeavour- 
ing to popularise the creed ahd programme bf the 
Hindu Maha Sahha in MaHarasTitra. Mr. R. G. Bhide, 
the Secretary of the All India Hindu Mahasabha, is 
the very life-breath 6f the Hindu Sahha ‘MOvbihent in 
Maharashtra. Periodical leCtUtes ate dblivcred by 
worhefs, becarional tours of notable leaders are arrang- 
ed and district conferences are ^Hcld "hith a viSw to 
Make the Maha Sabha Mbvement readh the last layer 
of the Hiiidh ObMlnimity. Many pehple in hitfes, 
towns and villa^bs ate spontaneously efirolliig their 
names as niehibers of the Hindu Mahasabha^ The 



>259 


iiumber of members has risen up to 20000. Town, 
City, Taluka and District Hindu Sabha Commit- 
tees are appointed and ,they are mustering strong 
day by day. The future .looks pregnant with en- 
couraging results. 

Shri L. B. Bhopatkar is at present the President 
and Shri R. Q. Bhide, the General Secretary of the 
Provincial Hindu Sabha. 


This part of Maharashtra was too orthodox to hear 
even the talk of the removal of untouehability, and 
yet the able leadership of Swant^U^^tryayeer V. D. 
Savarkar naade the untouehability, in almost all the 
parts of the district, a thing of the past. The people do 
not recognise the difference between l^uchability apd 
untouehability, so raueh so, that , even ^hil Hindu 
Upaha*; Grihas ( B^atawants for Hindus ) have cpme 
into existence.and the “^^sprishyas” are called “Purya- 
^prishyas” (Ex-Barijans). 

The same is the case with Shuddhi also. The Sana- 
tapi Biudu opinion was, deadly agaipst this ,uew .move, 
and yet slowly , but sprely Barrister Bfi'Varkar with his 
masterly argumentation and, a band of deyoted workers, 
changed the mentality of the .majority of the d)eople 



260 


and made the Shuddhi of about 350 and odd 
persons who were freely admitted to ^ the Hindu 
Society, and in this work the prominent members of 
the Hindu Sabha worked with Veer Savarkar and 
made the mission successful. 

The Hindus of Hindusthan had altogetlier forgotten 
that ‘Nepal forms an integral and indivisible part of 
our country and that the Nepalese are our own kith 
and kin.’ But the movement of the Hindu Sabha made 
the Hindu mind realise the oneness of Nepal Hindus 
with the Bharateeya H^indus. The Batnagiri Hindu 
Sabha was the first and foremost one amongst those of 
the other places in Hindusthan to back up the move 
mentioned above. 

The Ratnagiri Hindu Sabha was also the first and 
foremost institution not only to improve the Nagri Lipi 
and make it easier for printing, typing, etc. than even 
the English one, but to bring it in practice to a great 
deal by making men use it in their daily work and thus 
it brought about its improvement in actual, practical 
field. The same is the case with Bhasha Shuddhi also. 
In all our Bharteeya sister languages many words froiti 
foreign tongues, like English, Arabic, Persian, etc. 
have crept in. The spirit of eradicating those foreign 
words from the mother-tongues and thua making them 
pure., was created by the Sabha under the able 
guidance of Barrister Savarkar. . 





, 111 the last 12 or 14 years the Hindus there were: 
taught to fight out tha aggressions of, the Christians 
and specially of Moslems. The question of music 
before mosques was fought out favourably by the 
Hindus in Ratnagiri, Kharepatan, Shirgaon, etc. Cases 
were fought in courts and the riotous acts of the 
Moslems were duly paid in the same coin by 
the Hindus, who protected their own legitimate 
rights. So also the Hindus ably fought against the 
subtle aggression of the Christian missionaries, and at 
many places they had to wind up their schools and 
instead of increasing their activities of proselitisation, 
they were at a loss to keep up their own normal posi- 
tion even. And this became possible only by the 
movement of Shuddhi and removal of the ban of 
Rotibandi — taking food from other castes, etc. The 
idea of losing Jati at the hands of others, was given a 
rude shock and is now almost destroyed. 

Shree Patit Pa wan Mandir, meant for all Hindus 
inclu(^ >g the untoimhables, is not only proclaiming 
the praise-worthy generosity of Shrimant Bhagojee 
Seth Keer but the spirit of Pan-Hindutva throughout 
the country. Conceding to the request of the Hindu 
Sabha, Shrimant Bhagoji Seth built the Mandir 
worth Rs, 250000/-. The unique feature of this 
Mandir, thq like of which cannot yet be seen in the 
whole of • Hindusthan, is that every-one from the 



lowest of the low (the so-called iintoiiohables) upto the 
highest of the hig^h ( the Brahmins ), every Hindu of 
whatever gradation of the Hindu Society comes there, 
forgetting all the differences of castes and the like under 
the Hindu Dhwaja and performs the Puja, Bhajan, 
Darshan, and Vedapathan jointly. In the premises of 
the Mandir, untouchables, Brahmins and Non-Brahmins, 
all live there as neighbours and draw water from the 
same well. Thus a divided Hindu, from the moment 
he enters the Mandir, becomes one with all other 
Hindus and transcends all the differences of castes, etc. 

Owing to the persistent efforts of the Ratnagiri 
Hindu Sabha, a Vyayamshala was established by the 
Municipality where training is given in the use of 
lathis, swords, spears, etc. 

Within the period of 4 years the Ratnagiri Hindu 
Sabha has saved not less than 10 lacs of rupees from 
going to foreign countries by infusing the spirit of 
Swadefehi. At present Swade&hi doth is beiiig cousum- 
ed by 92?/o, soap by 95%, glass hj ^ Swa- 

deshi sugar bags about. 1500 in fodd, as again# previous 
figures, viz. cloth by Swadeshi aoapr pap^r a^^d 
glass by 2/% and Swadeshi sugar onjy bags* 

»The Akhanda ( continuous, ^^thonh iMseak ) !BhaJan 
lUr^TMays aud 7 nights makes one 
Sa|)tahas wore observed the Vaidic God^Tonapla? 
the Patitpawan Shree Vishnu ^Mandir, by .all the 



263 


Hindus— Brahmins, Kshatrlyas, Vaishyas, Shudras and 
the Purvaspriyas to-gether with complete equality. 
Such scenes of complete eradication of the Jat-pat 
(castes) will seldom be seen anywhere in our country 
as are seen in the Ratnagiri Hindu Sabha^s Shree 
Patitpawan Mandir. 

Each year the celebration of Shree Ganesh is a 
very prominent feature of Maharashtryia Hindus. 
That Utsava continues for 10 days. In this Patitpawan 
Mandir every Hindu without any distinction can and 
does take part. Keertan by Bhangis, Geetapath by 
Chamars, the carrying of the palaki (Palanquin) by 
Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Shudras, Harijans, etc. together^ 
dining in the same row, including men and women by 
thousands of all sections of the Hindus, such as Sikhs, 
Jains, Aryasamajists, Gorakhas, etc. are some of the 
chief features of programme in the Temple. 

Two hundred performances of dining to-gether 
(Seh Bhojas) in the same row by all Hindus, were per- 
formed in Ratuagiri and thus the caste consciousness 
is nearly annihilated there. 



Established in 1924. 


Thft Berar Provincial Hindu Sabha owes its origin to 
the Muslim troubles. It came into existence in the 
communal tension of 1924 regarding the immersion pro- 
cession of Ganpati. The fight put up by the Sabha not 
only brought a successful conclusion of the trouble, 
but also made the Sabha itself a living organisation. 
After this it extended its hands to various items which 
strengthened the Hindu Sanghatan Movement. With 
this object the Hindu Sabha made efforts to stop drain- 
age of untouchable Hindus to other religions, and by 
inducing the orthodox section of the upper classes, under- 
took the recon version- work against strong opposition. 
It was reported that lower class Hindus of Mangrul, 
Hiwarkhed and Digras, being harassed by the upper 
class ones in respect of drawing water from public 
wells and some other social customs, had decided to 
embrace Islam to avoid social inequality. The Hindu 
Sabha members at once hurried to these places and by 
mutual understanding saved these 1000 souls. In order 
to eradicate untouchability, the Provincial Hindu 
Sabha wrote to all the District Councils and the 



Municipalities in the province to keep open all public 
wells and schools for the untoucha1">les and thanks to 
the spirit of co-operation of these local bodies, reso- 
lutions were passed by them to that effect. Througli 
the efforts of the Hindu Sablia many temples in big 
towns were thrown open to the untouchables. A 
number of lecture-tours was arranged throughout the 
province to preach on the evils of untouchability. A 
Boarding House foj the untouchables was opened and 
financed by the Provincial Sabha. The 8abha also 
tried and successfully sent an untouchable member to 
the Municipality by a majority of toucliable Hindu 
votes, defeating the upper class Hindu candidate. By 
this time Dr. Ambedkar, the well-known leader of the 
depressed classes had declared to renounce Hinduism. 
At this declaration, the Muslims were overjoyed and 
wanted to convert him. Maulana Sliaukat Ali was 
after him and both of them had come to Paturda, a 
village near Shegaon in Berar, where it was intended 
to convert about 5000 untouchables to Islam. But 
this plan was frustrated, thanks to the efforts of the 
Arya Samaj and the Hindu Sabha. Only 11 persons 
out of 5000 accepted Islam — to renounce it after 3 
months through the efforts of the latter institution. 

Cow protection was also taken in hand. At the ins- 
tance of the Provincial Hindu Sabha, the Municipalities 
like Murtazapur, Wun, Arvi, etc. passed resolutions 



prohibiting the slaughter of milky and pregnant ani- 
mals and all cows and calves within their limits. 

Another sphere of the activity of the Provincial 
Hindu Sabha was the opening of an Orphanage. 
Besides this, in order to save the Hindu widows and 
orphans from going over to the Muslims, it was de- 
cided also to start ‘Vidhwa Ashram and Vidlnva 
Viwah Samsthah There were certain cases in wdiich 
Hindu women kidnapped by the Muslims w^ere re- 
covered through the civil courts. The Hindu commu- 
nity is ahvays reluctant to. take back such pei’sons and 
absorb them. The Hindu Mahasabha has to be on its 
alert against such desertions of Hindu women, and it is 
satisfying to note that the Provincial Hindu Sabha 
with all its branches is trying its best to retain those 
renegades within its fold. 

To cultivate the spirit of resistance tlie Sabha gave 
an inpetus to the starting of Akharas in all the towns 
of Berar where Hindu j^ouths are getting physical 
training. The Sabha also tried and succeeded to some 
extent in dispelling the false notions entertained by 
some Hindus regarding ‘Pir-worship’ and pilgrimage 
to ‘Shadal Boa’, etc. The Provincial Sabha arranged 
lectures and distributed handbills to dissuade Hindus 
from taking pait in the Moliarram festival with reli- 
gious f<rvour. The result is that iioav i)U7o cf the 
Hindus keep quite aloof. 





Tlie Provincial Sablia also undertook to ^Sluiddhi’ 
or lieconversioii. There were certain villages in the 
Melghat and by its border which were completely 
baptised by the Christian missionaries. The Sabha 
sent lecturers there and thousands of these souls were 
reclaimed. 

Tlie Berar Provincial Hindu Sa])lia invited the 
Akhil Rliaratiya Hindu Mahasabha and its Session was 
held at Akola in 1929 under the Presidentship of Pt. 
Madan Mohan Majavi^'a. Side by side with this Session 
other Conference®, viz., Hindu Voutli League, Hindu 
Sanghatan Parisliad and Shuddlii Parishad w(Te also 
lield. In 1990, tjte AH India Session of tlie Malia 
Sablia was to be lield in Andhra, but at tlie instance of 
Dr. Monjec the Berar Provincial Hindu Sabha again 
invited it. All tlie arrangements were nearly com- 
])lete but the AVorkiiig Committee of the Mahasabha 
postponed the Session, which wns afterwards lield at 
Salem, A Joint Session of the Berar and C. P, Sabha 
was called in 1997 at Akola under the Presidentship 
of Vir V. 1). Savarkar and a resolution -was passed, 
aiming at ‘Complete Independence' as the ultimate 
goal of the Hindu aspirations. 

Siu’i P. C. Jogalekar is at present tlie President 
and Shri C. K. Chitalay the Gejieral Secretary of the 
Provincial Hiiidu Sabha. 



Established in 1924. 


The Bengal Provincial Hindu Saldia has at present 
about 170 branches under it including the Sylhet 
District in the Assam province, which is affiliated with 
the Bengal Provincial Hindu Sabha. Every district 
and sub-divisional town has got a ]>ranch Sabha 
beside many of the important villages of tlie province. 
T)ie branch Sabhas have been re-organised during the 
j'ear lOdS and most of the branches have been 
thoroughly overhauled with new office-bearers. The 
branches are now actively carrying out the programme 
of the Hindu Mahasabha and have ))een imbued with 
a new life. 

It is difficult to exacrtly state the number of 
members of tlie Hindu Sabha branches. New member- 
shi}) receipt l>ook.s have been printed and distributed 
to branch Sabhas for enrolment of members. ''Phere 
is a great deal of enthusiasm for the Hindu Sabha 
Movement in this province and according to moderate 
estimate at least ten thousand members have in all 
been enrolled. The work is proceeding steadily and 
it is hoped that in next six months a hundred thou- 
sand members will have been enlbtecl. 



The Bengal Provincial Hindu Sablia observed tb^ 
Anti-Coin munal Award Day on the 18th of August last 
in a befitting manner throughout the province. In 
Calcutta proper tliree public meetings w’ere held on 
that day which were addressed by influential Hindu 
leaders. Besides towns like Itajshahi, Pabna, Natore, 
Maldali, Sirajgunge, Bogra. Kurigram, Gaibandha, 
Nilphamari, Jalpaignri, Dacca, Comillaj Noakhali, 
Manikgunj, Kislioreganj, Burdwan and other places 
observed the Day an<^ enthusiastic'ally held public 
demonstrations. 

The Bengal Provincial Hindu Sal>ha took prompt 
steps when Paiulit Jawaharlal Nehru on behalf of the 
Congress publicly oifered Mr. Jinnah to accept the 
terms of the Jinnali-Rajendraprasad Aofreement. The 
Executive Committee of the Sablia issued a statement 
denouncing the proposed Agreement and subsequently 
a protest meeting was held at the Albert Hall presided 
over by 8j. Ramananda Chatterjee. Besides 15 other 
districts held public meetings strongly condemning the 
Agreement. 

The position of the Hindus has been further compli- 
cated by adoption b}^ the Bengal Legislative Assembly 
of a resolution reserving 60% of all recruitment of 
public services for the Moslems, W% for the scheduled 
castes and 207o The Congress members 

who remained neutral on the resolution and the state- 



270 


ment of the CoiigToss Assembly leader, Sj, ^^arat 
Chandra Bose on tlie subject practically lending his 
support to the infamous resolution have been , seriously 
criticised throughout the province. The Bengal Pro- 
vincial Hindu Sabha convened a public meeting at the 
Albert Hall presided over by Mr. S. K. Hoy Chowdhury, 
ex-Mayor of Calcutta in winch the attitude of the 
Congress members was strongly condemned. Besides 
almost all the districts and sub-divisional Hindu 
8abhas denounced the resolution and tlie statement of 
Mr. Sarat Chandra Bo^e. 

The Sabha maintains two preachers wlio tour 
in the districts, propagating? the message of the 
Hindu Sabha and keep in touch with the branches 
with a view to help them to carry out the constructive 
work of the Sabha. The Bengal ]hx)vincial Hindu 
Sabha has a clearly defined constructive ] programme 
which aims at weldin? (h ^ different castes and commu- 
nities into a component whole by pursuing a pro- 
gramme such as removal of untouchability, abolition 
of cliih_rmarriage and dowry systems, amelioration of 
the condition of the Hindu widows, proteittion of 
women, widow-remarriage, uplift of the backward 
classes, organisation of Sarbajanin Pujas for the benefit 
of Hindus of all castes, establishment of Akharas, Clubs 
and Gymnasiums for the physical regeneration of tlie 
Hindu youths and similar otlier social uplift works. The 



271 


programme is very popular among tlie backward classes 
and the Rablia has a solid backing of these classes. 

During the year 19BS our preachers vi'sited most of 
the districts and sub-divisional towns in the province, 
particularly in tlie North and Eastern Bengal and 
reorganised bran(;li Sabhas in these places and address- 
ed public meetings. They visited Klmlna, Barisal, 
Ohandpur, Comilla, Sylhet, Karimguncre, Habigunge, 
Moulvibazar, Hailakandi, Netrakona, Kishoregunj, 
Mymensingh, f^jrajgunj, Pabna. Natore, Naogaon, 
Eajshahi, Bogra, Sherpur, Enngpur, Kurigram, 
OaibaiKlha, Balurghat, Dinajpur, Saidpur, Dooars, 
Jalpaiguri, Maldah, Assansole, Eanigunge, Burdwan, 
and other important towns. 

The Hindu Sabha Movement was initiated in 
Bengal by the late Sj. Piyush Kanti Ghosh, of the 
‘Amrita Bazar Patrika’, in the year 1924 following the 
Saharan pur riot in U. P. The terrible communal riot 
of Calcutta of 192G lent a great impetus to the move- 
ment} which gained added momentum as further 
communal x’iots broke out in dilferent places in the 
province in the succeeding years. The Pabna riot, 
the Kishoreganj riot, the Dacca riot and the Chitta- 
o-ono; riot sent a thrill of horror amongst the Hindu 
community, served to open their eyes about their own 
defenceless position against the Moslem aggression and 
immensely strengthened the Hindu Sabha Movement. 



Ill 1925 tlie All India Hindu Mahasblia Session was 
held in Calcut^-a wliicli was presided over by late Lala 
Lajpat Rai, the Lion of the Punjab. The first session 
of the Bengal Provincial Hindu Gonfexenc,e was held at 
Sirajgunge which was presided over by Babu Sasadhar 
Roy, Advocate, Calcutta High Court and attended by 
Swami Shraddliananda of revered memory. The second 
session was held at Calcutta under the presidentship 
of Sj. Hirendra Nath Dutt, M. A., B. L., Solicitor, the 
third session was held at Mymensingh under the pre- 
sidentship of Mahamaliopadhyaya Pramatha Naili 
Tarkabhusan, the fourth at Dacca under the presi- 
dentship of Mr. N. C. Kelkar of Maharashtra, the fifth 
at Burdwan under the presidentship of Maharaja 
iSrish Chandra Nandi of Kasimbazar and the sixth 
session of the Conference was held at Maldah under 
the presidentship of Babu Ramananda Chatterjee. 

Shri Bhai Parmanandji also presided over a special 
Provincial Hindu Conference in Calcutta in 1934. 

Shri Rai Satindra Nath Chowdhuri is at present the 
President and Shri Ashutosh Lahiri, the General 
Secretary of the Provincial Hindu Sabha. 



SIJNDH 


I'lstaUlished in 192d. 


The Sindh rroviiicial Hindu Sablin was founded 
in 1926, when a Provincial Hindu Ponferenee was 
organized here under the ])residents]ii]) of the late Lala 
Lajpat Pai. ]Mr. Jai Ram Daiilt liam was a prominent 
leader of tlie Hindus in those da^^s. 

The Provincial Sindh Hindu Sabha has the follow- 
ing District Hindu Sabhas as its brandies : — 

Karachi. H 3 "derabad, Sukkur, Nawabsliah, Ratod- 
pero, (Larkana), Shikarpur and Shahdadkot. 

Soon after the introduction of Jieforms of 19d5 in 
India the Provincial Autonom}’^ was set up. The Pro- 
vincial Hindu Sabha contested the seats in the Assem- 
bly against the Congress, set up their own candi- 
dates and succeeded in securing f 1 seats out of 18. 
It is a matter of congratulation that the Hindu 
members in the Assembh^ are working in a team under 
a leader of their own choice, who is also one of the three 
ministers of the present Government. After a 3 ^ear 
the first reactionaiy and communal ministry was suc- 
ceeded by a less communal ministry with the supjiort 
of Hindus. 



271 


Tlie policy of the Government in Sindh regarding 
the important cadres of services is not based on merit 
but on communal considerations against which the 
Hindu Sabha has appealed and protested to the 
authorities concerned from time to time. In Octol^er 
1937 a Hindu Conference was held at Karachi under 
the Presidentship of Bliai Parmanand, M. L. A., a 
veteran Hindu leader of All India Hindu fame, wliere 
representatives from all parts of Sindli assembled. 
Several resolutions were ])assed, such as the passing 
of the discriminatory bills and the appointments of 
important cadres in Sindh on communal basis. The 
other resolutions were on Sangathan of Hindus, on 
Shuddhi, etc. 

The Hindus in mofussils are usually the victims of 
Police oppressions and of Mohamedan dacoits and 
robbers. They usually look up to the Hindu Sabha 
for the redress of their grievances. A few instances 
are quoted here : — 

1. The Hindus in a village of Hyderabad district 
w^ere oppressed by the Police and they approached the 
Hindu Sabha. The Secretary approached the authori- 
ties and convinced them of the genuineness of the 
complaint with the result that the ofl\adii3g officer 
w^as immediately removed. 

2. In another case, a property of some Iliudns 
worth about Es. 3000/- was stolen by some Mnslims 



275 


aiul the Police did not take notice of the complaint. 
The Secretary on being approached by these poor 
people took up their cause with the result that steps 
were taken and tlie stolen property was recovered to a 
great extent. 

b. A boy of two and a half years was kidnapped 
and was subsequently secured with the help of the 
Hindu Sabha. 

4. A girl of 10 j^ears was recovered a few years 
bfick from the posseswsion of Mohamedans l>y the 
Hindu Sabha and kept in a safe custody with a Hindu 
family. She was married to her own caste-man only 
about 4 months back. 

5. Public holidays, such as Krishna Ashtmi, Rama- 
navami and Gita-Jayanti, are observed by the Hindu 
Sabha to infuse enthusism among the Hindus of all 
sections and to bring them under one banner. On 
these occasions processions are taken out and meetings 
are organized. 

6. Ramanavami was declared as a sectional holiday 
in Sindh at the request of Sindh Hindu Sabha on 
behalf of the Hindus. 

7. To carry the message of Hindu Sabha outside 
the big cities, Pandit Rameshwar Swami was sent out 
to carry on the propaganda for about 2 months. 

8. Two persons living in Hyderabad having no 



276 


relatives died and their cremation ceremoiij’ wavS per- 
formed by the Hindu Sabha. 

9. One woman disappeared from Hyderabad and 
was traced in Shikarpnr with the help of Hindu 
Sahha. 

A wave of joy spread tliroiio-hont Sindh, in Auo*nst 
last, when the Sindh Hindus were informed that their 
veteran leader and President of the Hindu Mahasabha, 
Vir V.D. Savarkar liad agreed to visit Sindh . Kn-roiite to 
Hyderabad on 1st September thousands of people went 
to Avelcome and to pay their homage to him on inter- 
vening statiojis. At Hyderabad, liis first halting plac^e 
in Sindli, he liad a heavy programme to go through. 
Inspite of lu's short stay he visited the big cities of 
Sindh such as Karachi, Hyderabad, Shikarpnr and 
Nawabshah. AVherever he went he had the gi'andest 
recepiions. Processions were organized wherever he 
went and public and Municipal addresses were presented 
to him. Huge meetings were held where all people, 
councillors, merchants, teachers and others were pre- 
sent. Yir Savarkar in his speeches assured Sindh 
Hindus of their great and glorious future that yet 
aw^aits the Hindu Nation. Thousands of people paid 
their homage to him wherever he went to spread the 
message of Hindu Sabha. Several ^Vt Homes’ were 
given in his honour. In fact he had an ovation of 
which the Sindh Hindus can feel proud. Huring his 



‘277 


sliort stny in Siiulli a Conference was held at Sukkar 
on 7th and 8th of September und<^r his presidentship 
wliere people from all ]>arts of Sindh came. It was a 
very successful Conference. In fact the Hindu Commu- 
nity was electrified by his speeches. The ]]cerssity of 
such frequent visits is felt hy the Sindh Hindus as it 
will continue to keep alive the enthusiasm and love 
for Hindu Community. 

The Head Office of the Provincial Hindu Sabha is 
now situated at Hyderabad (Sindh). Shri Mukhi 
Gobindrai Pritamdas. M. L. A. is at present the Presi- 
dent and Shri Dhnramdas Belaram, tlm General 
Secretary. 



Established in 1927. 


The Rajasthan (Rajputana) Provincial Hindu Sablia 
was founded in 1927. A large number of Hindus have 
joined its membership. There are about 20 branches 
of the Provincial Hindu Sablia. The Rajasthan 
Provincial Sabha has so far organised 12 sessions. The 
Rajasthan Provincial Hindu Sabha has been taking keen 
interest in the uplift of the Depressed Classes and in 
Shuddhi and Sangatlian. Its activities include the cele- 
bration of the lives of Hindu Heroes, and the propaga- 
tion of Hindi language. The Sablia has also organised 
aCSwayam Sewak Dal.’ In 1933, the Provincial 
Hindu Sabha invited the 15th Session of the Akhil 
Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha at Ajmer, which was pre- 
sided over by Shri Bhai Parmanandji. 

Kunwar Cliand Karan Shardha is at present the Pre- 
sident and Babu Durga Prasad, the General Secretary 
of the Provincial Hindu Sabha* 



OUJjJAR.A\T 


Established in 1927. 


The Gujarat Provincial Hindu Sablia was establish- 
ed on the 2nd Oct. 1927. In oiir province before that 
date the Bombay Tresidency Hindu Sabha had opened 
working centres at Baroda, Anand, Ahinedabad, 
Ankleswar, Surat and Biilsar. All the centres were 
working hard day and night for the San^athan, 
Shuddhi, and uplift of the so-called depressed and the 
suppressed classes. These centres created a field and 
a feeling amongst the masses and a nucleus of 250 
Hindu Sabha branches arose. Hindus of Gujarat felt 
themselves awakened and a spirit of co-ordination and 
unity pervaded. 

At that time there were no institutions, where 
the converted could be kept. Hence the workers 
opened an Arya Kumar Ashram at Kaulibeg Baroda in 
1923 for the housing of the converted. 

Bhil Aslirams were established at Amrit Pura, 
Ankleswar and Broach dt. As time passed the workers 
felt the necessity of sound institutions and hence the at- 
mosphere established the other institutions too. The 



‘280 


Arya Kaiiya. Malia Mdyalaya Baroda, Abla Asliram 
Barocla, Hindu Mission Aliniedabad, Hindu Mission 
Surat, Giirukul Maha Vidyalaya Songad Kathiawar, 
etc. — all these institutions are the sweet 'fruits of the 
vSangatliau movement and at ])resent are {'<indu(“tc<l 
under the control and supervision of the Baroda 
Arya Kumar Maha Sabha, wliich is a registeiod body 
in Baroda. 

We invited tlie 12th Session of tlie Hindu Maha 
Sabha at Surat in 1929 A. D. whieli was held there 
under the presidentship of Babu Bamauand Chatterji. 

In 19;50 the all India }>olitieal movement was in its 
full speed. From our province, young and old, every- 
body joined the movement and thus tlie Sangathan 
movement slackened for the time being and till 1935 
the Provincial body worked very little. It again began 
to function in 1937 when we invited the 19th Session 
of the Hindu Maha Sabha, which was lield under the 
presidentship of Vir Savarkarji at Ahmedabad. 

Shri Raja Mukund Lai Pitti is at present the 
President and Shri B. K. Patwari Advocate, the Gene- 
ral Secretary of the Provincial Hindu Sabha. 



Established 1927 


SoDie work for t.lie interest of the Hindus in gene- 
ral was done iii the district of Nowgong by a few 
Hindu citizens of this town but the tragic end of Swami 
Shraddhanaiidji has been an eye-o]>ener to many Hindus 
here and the}' at once started a campaign for collection 
of money to the Slirafldhanauda Trust Fund in tJie 
year 1927. Till this event the Hindus in Assam 
failed to realise the working of the non-Hindu orga- 
nisations in Assam whicli vitally affeoted the interests 
of the Hindus. The hlea of struggle to protect and 
promote the ctuiimon interests of the Hindus arose 
at that time. 

In this very year a local Hindu Sabha was started 
tor the first time adopting the aims and objects of the 
All India Hindu Mahasablia. 

In the following year, i. e. in 1928 the first Pro- 
vincial Hindu Conference was held in the town of 
Nowgoiig under the Presidency of Di\ B, S. Moonje, 
It was a great success as all influential Hindus irres- 
pective of caste and creed gathered there to hear the 
message of Dr. Moonje, His Hpliness the Adhikar 



282 


Goswami of Garaiuur took a leading part in ilie 
affairs and a strong Provincial Committee represent- 
ing different shades of opinion and interests was 
formed. 

In the year 1929 in the capital of the Ahorn 
Kulers of Assam, i. e. Sibsagar town, the second Hindu 
Conference was held with grand success under the 
Presidency of Mahamohopadhyaya Pramathanath Tar- 
kabhusan of Hindu University, Benares. 

From 1930 to 1934 no conference could be held duo 
to political agitations; but in December 1935 the third 
Hindu Conference was held with great eclat under the 
presidency of Dr. Mooiije in the town of Nowgong 
(Assam). No conference has been held since then but 
nevertheless the Provincial Hindu Sabha with the kind 
and active assistance of Srijut Satis Singhji has done 
immense work in its constructive side. 

There has been intense propaganda in the villages 
of this province popularising the aims and objects of the 
Hindu Mahasabha, especially among of the ex-tea gar- 
den labourers and Hill tribes — chiefly Mikirs, Lalungs 
and Kacharis. As a result of this propaganda about 3 
lacs of tribal people recorded themselves as Hindus 
in the last Census. An excer])t from the Census 
Report of 1931 noted below will cleaxdy show the work 
done by the Hindu Babha here : ‘‘There can be no 
doubt that the Hindu Sabha acliieved a considerable 



283 


measure of success and that by its efforts the number 
of animists was mucli reduced and the number of the 
Hindus correspondingly increased. ( Vol. Ill, pp. 
118-189). Several meetings were held in the different 
centres amongst the untouchables and caste Hindus 
and they freely joined hands among themselves. 

The Sabha could have achieved more but for the 
fact that the Hill tracts are not allowed to be pene- 
trated freely although the Christian Missionaries have 
full access to these areas. 

Besides, some schools and temples also were estab- 
lished among these backward tribes and the ex-tea 
garden labourers. It is pleasing to note here tliat all 
the schools subsequently have ])een taken by the 
Local Board. 

During the great flood of 1934 in the district of 
Nowgong, a Sub-Committee was formed known as the 
‘‘Hindu Sabha Relief Committee’' for the purpose of 
doing relief work. The Committee distributed 
amongst the helpless 2500 pieces of clothes and gratui- 
tous relief to the extent of Rs. 3H00/-. The Committee 
helped the villagers in repairing 15 Namgliars (places 
of worship) damaged by the flood, took special 
care of 2u0 widows, rescued 7 helpless girls from 
starvation and sliauie and took charge of 2 orphan 
babies who were about to bt% given to the Cliristiaii 
Missionaries. 



357 persons (girls 233, adult females 58, children 
34, and youngmen 32) were rescued from the hands 
of the non-Hindus, mostly Mohammedans, by the 
Sabha during the period under report. Some of 
these were restored after good deal of persuasion to 
their relatives. 

44 girls were given in mj\ri*iage — majority of them 
among their own castes and a few among others. iS girls 
and adult females wore sent to Bumitra and Banita 
Ashrams at Monghor and Hindu Abla Ashmm in 
Bengal. In many cases rescues were done with the 
help of the courts. 

4.54 persons — girls, adult females^ boys and adiilt 
males, were icconverted to Hinduism — 382 persons 
from Islam and 72 from Christianity. To encourage 
the above a Conference was held in December 1935 
at Nowgong (Assam) under the Presidency of Balm 
Jagatnara)’ an I .all . 

9 babies varying from 2 to 10 months have been 
taken over charge by the Sabha. — 7 of whom have 
been taken over by 7 families and accepted as their 
own and 2 babies are still in charge of the Sabha. 

40 persons have been given medical akl together 
with foodiiig and clothing as otherwise they were 
tempted to embrace Islam. 

The Sabha felt keenly, by practically working in 
the field, the want of an Anatli Ashram in the Assam 



285 


valley and iu the inonth of February 193f> an Ashram 
was established in an humble way in the town of 
Nowgoiig and it was ran till June 1937 when it had 
to be closed for want of funds: and 9 inmates living in 
the Ashram have been kept in dillerent places as a 
temporary measure. The ex:istence oi such an institu- 
tion is a very urgent matter if rescues and Shuddhis 
are to continue unabated. 

Rai Saheb Qopiballav (loswami was deputed by 
the Sabha to appear as a witness on its behalf before 
the Assam Franchise Committee at Hhillong, and the 
Lothian Committee at Calcutta. 

Rai B.vhadur B. C. (ioswanii and Sjt. Bimola 
Kanta Bora attejided on belialt of the A. P. H. S. the 
L'uity Conference held at Calcutta under the presidency 
of Pandit Malaviynji. 

Tlie Sabha prot(\<ted against the atrocities of the 
Mohammedans committed against the Hindus, sent 
sympathetic resolutions and also cash contributions to 
the sufferers of Bhopal, Ohunargarli, Chittagong, 
Dera Ismail Khan and Kashmir. 

The Sabha also sent a contribution to the Hindu 
Sabha Bihar Earthquake Relief Fund and Anti- 
Malaria Relief Fund in Ceylon through Sreemati 
Amrit Kaxir. 

Shri R. B. Brindraban Chandra is at present the 
General Secretary of the Provincial Hindu Sabha. 



THE DECCANl STATES 

As in British India, the activities of the Hindu 
Mahasabha are carried on a large scale in Sangli, 
Miraj, Kolahpur and in other Deccan States. 

So far as Kolahpur is concerned, they have got 
a Hindu Sabha of their own carrying on activities 
primarily as regards the removal of untouchability. 
The late Maharaja of Kolahpur took an active interest 
in the cause of the removal of untouchability. The 
present Maharaja and his Prime Minister as well as 
Shrimat Khshatrya Jagat Guru are also deeply interest- 
ed in the matter. The Aiyasamaj also plays an impor- 
tant part in the reinov'^al of untouchability and recon- 
version. The Kolahpur State has in this respect become 
a great centre of reconversion and removal of untouch- 
ability. Dr. Balkrishna, the Principal of the Rajaram 
College, Kolahpur is a devoted Aryasamajist and under 
his guidance much social work is done. 

Sangli also ])lays an important part so far as the 
Hindu- Muslim question is concerned. The local 
branch of tiie Hindu Sabha has got neaHy two thou- 
sand members and practically Sangli is going to be 
a strong centre of all tlie activities of the Hindu 
Sabha. Miraj also plays its own role in the Hindu 



Sablia activities. Jt is because of the dastardly acts 
on the part of the Muslims that so many Hindus are 
taking deep interest in the activities of the Hindu 
Sablui. At Kolahpur, there is a ‘Rescue*home’ and 
the residents of Hangli wish to start a similar institu- 
tion to deUil with the cases of dcp)’aved women. 

An attempt is made at Sangli to carry on mass 
contact movement among the Hindus and it is hoped 
that in the near future the local Hindu Sabha will be 
able to carry onits activities among all the sects of the 
Hindu community. A better feattire of the Hindu Sabha 
activities is that Hindu ladies and young educated girls 
are taking deep interest in the activities of the local 
Hindu 'Sabha and if this movement on their part gets 
deep-rooted it is hoped that this Hindu-Musiim 
question will disappear in a short time from Sangli. 

The Raja Sahib of Sangli is very kind and holds 
scales even between all communities in the Sangli 
State and it is because of this attitude on his part 
that all things are going on smoothly at Sangli 
even to-day. 






The ‘so-called Communal Award’ is the direct 
outcome of ‘the Sepamte Communal Electorates’, 
always demanded and pressed for by the Muslims, 
sup])orted by the Government and yielded to by the 
Indian National Congress. 

THE ANGLO-MUSLIM ALLIANCE 

Wlieu the last lloforms were in the making and 
the British Government were holding Round Table 
Conference delib ra ions, Mr. Gandhi participated 
along with others who were specially invited 
the Government themselves. As is usual with him, 
Mr. Gandhi, witli his queer notion of Hindu Muslim 
Unity began to follow the will-o-’-the wisp theory 
of that unity. Knowing full well tliit his failure was 
a foregone conclusion the new Conservative Gov’'ern- 
ment of England settled with the Muslim leaders and 
a friendly alliance was established between them. This 
alliance was the inevitable outcome of Mr. Gandhi’s 
wrong attitude and mis-handling of the situation. 

As a result of this the Premi-er took upon himself 
the uncalled for duties of an ^arbitrator’ and announced 
his Decision on August 17, 1932 under the name of 



292 


! the Oommunal Award It was supplemented by 
another announcement some time later. 

This Communal Award at once sealed the fate and 
future of the Hindus of Hindusthan. It was as if a 
punishment for their patriotic sacritices done by them 
for the cause of their motherland. They were made 
helots in their very liome. 

THE CUP OF POISON 

Writing on the Hindu-Muslim Communalism and 
condemning both, Pandit Jawaharalal Nehru remark- 
ed ^*It is also true that the Communal Award 

is an utter negation of nationalism and is meant to 
divide Hindusthan into communal compartments and 
give strength to disruptive tendencies and thus to 
strengthen the hold of British Imperialism’^ Even 
Dr. Ansari and Mr. Sherwani in a joint statement 
emphasised the main features of the Communal Award 
in the following words : — 

“Perpetuating and stimulating the cause of divid- 
ing Indians, accentuation and extension of communal 
divisions and creation of fresh communal groups and 
interests which would shatter all future prospects of 
communal co-operation, these are the main features 
of the ‘Communal Award’/’ Later on, Dr. Ansari 
even went to the length of describing the Oommunal 
Award as a ‘cup of poison’. 



29H 


MR. GANDHI SUCCUMBS TO MUSLIMS’ 
PRESSURE 

Every leader, to whatever shade of opinion he 
might belong, emphatically condemned the Award 
as anti-national and unsatisfactory and a wave of 
indignation seemed to sweep over the country. But 
before the Congress could come out with its definite 
and delibei'ate decision it was leaked out in certain 
quarters that Mr. Gandhi was being approached by 
some of the influential Muslims either to accept 
the Award or at least not to allow the Congress to 
gainsay it. Bhai Parmanand came to know of it 
and he wrote a very strong letter to Mr. Gandhi 
imploring him therein not to give in under the undue 
pressure and thereby betray the true feelings of India 
as a whole. The letter, however, had no effect, and 
Mr. Gandhi at last yielded to the anti-democratic 
influences. Hence it was he and he alone who brought 
round the Congress Working Committee to adopt the 
neutral attitude of ‘neither accepting nor rejecting’ the 
Communal Decision. 

HIS FAST RESPONSIBLE FOR ^THE POONA PACT’ 

While the country had been roused against the 
sense of injustice done to India by the British 
Premier in this way, Mr. Gandhi’s fast unto death 
suddenly diverted the attention of the people from 



294 


the veAl issue of doing away with the Award and 
concentrated it only to save bis life witli the object of 
getting joint elections of Depressed classes and 
the caste Hindus. This move on the part of Mr. 
Gandhi which ultimately resulted in the formation 
of Hhe Poona Pact’ added to the misfortunes of the 
Hindus whose interests were sacrificed for good to 
save Mr. Gandhi's life. The terms dictated by Dr. 
Ambedkar were hastily accepted and a fiirtlier split 
among the Hindus was created hy alotting certain 
number of seats for the depi’essed classes in the Pun- 
jab and Bengal out of the meagre proportion of the 
Hindu seats — a split which was not even thought of 
by the Premier himself. 

Inspite of telegrams of protests sent by Bliai 
Parmanandji from Simla against the proposed accepi- 
anceof the Ambedkar's terms, whatever apparent good 
the Poona Pact was supposed to have contained, was 
later on nullified by the Government adopting commu- 
lative methods instead of distributive methods of voting 
by the Caste Hindus and the Depressed classes. 

THE FAILURE OF UNITY CONFERENCE 

Pandit M. M. Malaviya,it seemed, did not take the 
Gommtinal Decision at first so seiiously. He tried 
to have another Hindu-Muslim Unity Conference at 
Allahabad. Bhai Parmanand was also invited to this 



295 


Conference. In a sliorfc speech in the Conference 
he, at the very outset, explained tliat the Conference 
could serve no useful pur])Ose if the setting aside of 
the Communal Award was ]iot made tlje ])rimary 
condition and the basis for further negotiations. His 
proposal was not accepted and Rhaiji left Allahabad in 
disappointment. The Conference went on for two 
months and ended in fiasco. 

BHAIJI COMBATS THE AWARD’ INSIDE 
AND OUTSIDE THE ASSEMBLY 

Rhai Parmanaiid took ii])on liimself to ('inubat the 
Communal Award on behalf of the Hindu Mahasabha 
and it has since then carried on its struggle against the 
Award under his guidance. 

He was the only Hindu leader who opposed the 
Communal Award and the White J hiper from the floor 
of the Central Legislative Assembly. His two speech- 
es delivered on March 13, 1933 and on March 29, 
1937 are memorable in as much as these clearly 
placed before the Government and the country the 
position of the Hindus in the proposed constitution. 
He concluded one of his speeches in the Assembly 
in the following pathetic words : — 

*“*1 do not think there could be a greater injustice 
and inequity that could be done to a gx^eat and aiici- 



296 


ent race. I would go a step further and say that 
this shows a kind of vindictiveness on the part of the 
Government towards the Hindus on account of the 
various ways of agitation they have adopted against 
the Government. No doubt a very large number of 
agitators come from tlie Hindus, but there can be no 
doubt also that this class does not represent the real 
Hindu mind or Hindu feeling. The Hindu population 
though feeling interested in the present agitation for 
various reasons, is, in fact, keeping itself distinct and 
watching the events in the capacity of a spectator. 
Any kind of vindictiveness on the part of an enlight- 
ened Government towards a whole people would be 
unpardonable in the eyes of God and unjustifiable in 
the eyes of history. I beg to submit, therefore, that 
there is yet time for the Government to intervene and 
have this wrong redressed.” 

DR. MOONJE’S STATEMENTS 

Dr. B. S. Moouje, then the Working President of 
the Hindu Mahasabha, R. B. Mehr Chand Khanna, Mr. 
B. C. Chatterjee of Bengal, Syt. Ram Rao Desh Mukh 
ex-Minister C. P., Mr. Gavoi of Nagpur and the late 
Prof. Chhablaui of Sindh sailed for London to submit 
their evidences before the Joint Parliamentary Select 
Coipinittee. Dr. B. S. Moonje, on behalf of the Hindu 
Mahasabha, submitted the following statements which 



297 


contain all what the Mahasabha has to say on the 
minorities problem generally : — 

In this connection particular attention is drawn 
to the facts : 

SANCTITY OF THE ‘LUCKNOW PACT’. 

(a) That since 1916 an agreement^ of mutual consent 
in brotherly friendship betv^een Hindus and Moslems known 
as the Lucknow Pact, is in actual operation through the 
present Government of India Act. 

(b) That it is the Moslems who are now repudiating 
this Pact of mutual agreement. The Hindus object to such 
unilateral repudiation. 

(c) That even the Simon Commission have practically 
supported this very reasonable opposition of the Hindus in 
their recommendations in respect of the Lucknow Pact and 
hold the view that until a new pact of mutual agreement is 
arrived at, the old pact, called the Imcknow Pact, must 
stand. 

Under the circumstances the Biitish Government should 
say, as did the Eight Honourable Mn Thomas, Secretary for 
the Dominions, in his speech on the Irish question for 
similar reasons, in the House of Commons on the 4th of 
July, 1932 

‘^fiut we will not be a party and cannot be a party to 
allowing a question of this kind which is a solemn obligation 
made between two people to be treated simply as if it were 
a scrap of paper.” 



298 


Neither party has a moral right to repudiate the Pact 
and if solemn pacts pledging the honour and word of peoples 
are allowed to be repudiated and treated as a scrap of 
paper In easy consciencef peaceful and ordered conditions 
of life will Tanisb and civilized life itself^ as has been so 
truly said by the Eight Honourable Mr. Thomas, will be 
made impossible. 

DECISION OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 
ON THE COMMUNAL PROBLEM. 

This decision is moat uniust to the Hindus generally 
and to the Hindu minorities particularly for the following 
reasons; — 

(a) That in provinces where the Moslems form minority 
communities^ weightages sanctioned under the present 
GoTernment of India Act have not only been generally 
maintained but in the provinces of U. Bibar and C. P.. 
there is even slight increase in those weightages. 

(b) That while maintaining these weightages for the 
Moslem minorities, the representation which was given to 
the Hindu minorities of the Punjab and Bengal under the 
present Government of India Act has been very much 
reduced^ and not only no weightage is given but the 
representation that is now provided by the White Paper for 
the Hindu Minorities in the Punjab and Bengal is even 
below what they are entitled to on the popula^ou basis in 
their respective provinces. 

(e) That in the Punjab and Bengal where the Moslems 
form the majority communities, provision has been made for 



299 

gaaranteeini? majority by statute, though indirectly to the 
Moslem majority in the Punjab and for guaranteening a 
large majority by statute to the Moslem majority in Bengal 
over the Hindu minority who have been thus deprived of 
all possible constitutional means of converting their minority 
into political majority. 

(d) In Bengal the Moslems form 64.8 percent of the 
population and the Hindus and others, that is, Buddhists, 
Jains. Jews, Sikhs, Animists form 44.8 per cent of the 
population. The Hindus have not been given represe jtation 
even in proportion to their population. Educationally and 
culturally they are most advanced. Their contribution to 
Public Revenues is the largest. They play a much more 
important part in the field of commerce and industry 
than the Mohammedans, According to the calculation of 
Sir N. N. Sircar, Member, Joint Parliamentary Committee, 
out of 34 seats assigned to special constituencies, no more 
than 11 seats will come to the Hindus, nine are likely to go 
to the Mohammed^s and 14 to Europeans and Anglo 
Indians So out of a House of 250 Hindus get only 91 seats, 
that is to say 36.4 percent, Christians including Europeans 
end Anglo-Indians who form 36 percent of tbe population 
And should get only one seat on the basis of their popula- 
tion, get 31 seatsi which means a weightage of 8100 percent. 
Such a weightage is out of all proportion to whatever 
considerations they may be entitled to for their share in 
Commerce, but all these considerations are entirely ignored 
where the Hindus are concerned. 

Over and above all this comes the Poona Pact which is 



300 


based on the figures given in column 6, page 119 of the 
Indian Franchise Committee’s Eeport. These figures, as 
shown in the Report, are under revision. 1! test of un- 
toucbability, which ought to be the only test as prescribed 
by the Indian Franchise Committee is employed, the 
population of the Depressed Classes might be found to be 
.07 millions only. Therefore the number of seats for the 
Depressed Classes should be fixed after a fresh enquiry to 
determine the exact number of untouchables is ordered and 
its results are known, 

(e) That on the contrary in the Central Legislature the 
All India Hindu majority has been reduced to an absolute 
minority » as will be evident from the following : — 

(1) The Simon Commission allocated 150 seats to the 
Hindus including the depressed classes out of a total of 250 
in the Central Legislalure, that is 60 per cent. 

(2) The Government of India Despatch provides for 80 
seats for Hindus including depressed classes out of 150 seats 
to be returned by general territorial constituencies in a 
Honse of 200, thst is, 53 p. c. Besidef, out of the remainiDK 
60 seats, the Hindus could expect to get about 25 seats. 
Thus the proportion of the Hindus would have been about 
60 per cent. 

3. The White Paper provides for only 105 seats for 
Hindus including depressed classes out of 260 seats reserved 
for the British India side of the Federal Asseiwbly, that is, 
only 42 p. c. This percentage may rise to 45 p c., if the 
Hindus likely to be returned from special const! tueneie 
ore to be added 



301 


(f) That Sindh haa been separated if^noring the unanl^ 
mous and determined opposition of the Hindu minority of 
Sindh, who were not given a chance to send any repreeen- 

' tative to any of the three Bound Table Conferences and 
also the British Indian Delegation to the Joint Parliamentary 
Committee to present their case, though the Sindh Moslems 
were given two, if not three, representatives on the Round 
Table Conference. Thu« the decision of separating Sindh 
is an ex-parte judgment in its pure and naked form. 

(g) That separated Sindh being pronounced officially to 
be a deficit province with yearly deficit of not lees than Be. 
eighty lacs, it will be another piece of injustice if the deficit 
be made good by a subvention from the revenues of the 
Central Government to which the largest Contribution is 
made by the Hindus of India, who are opposed to separation 
equally with the Hindus of Sindh. 

N.B.- 


If Sindh must be separated, then the following propo* 
sals are made in the interest of justice to the Hindu 
minority: — 

(a) That after a lapse of five years after separation an 
enquiry should be made on the following lines : — 

(1) Has the efficiency of administration been main- 
tained at the same level at which it was when Sindh 
formed a part of Bombay Presidency. 

(2) Has there been the same progress in nation- 
building departments as there is in Bombay. 



(S) Does the minority community enjoy the same 
degree of security of life and property as it did when Sindh 
formed part of Bombay. 

(4) Is the province financially solvent and sound. 

(b) That the constitution should provide inter-alia for 
the re- amalgamation of Sindh with Bombay if the results of 
the enquiry mentioned above are not satisfactory. 

(c) That proposals for taxation should not be such as to 
throw a disproportionately heavy burden ouathe minority. 

(d) That the majority community should get no preferen- 
tial treatment for 

(1) Recruitment to Services. 

(2) Admission to Educational institutions. 

{’6) Acquisition of property. * 

(e) That discriminatory laws like the Land Alienation 
Act should be interdicted. 

(h) That similarly exparte decisions have been taken in 
respect of the N. W F. Province without giving any chance 
to the Hindu minority of the province to represent their case 
at the Round Table Conference. The Moslem majority of 
the province was represented on the Conference by a power- 
ful and iuEuential representative, the Hon^ble Sir Abdul 
Quayum, and the Hindu minority was not given any repre- 
sentative at all. 

In view of special Imperial conditions for which the 
N. W. F. Province was separated from the Punjab, special 



safeguards should be provided for the protection of the Hindu 
minority and the maintenance of Law and Order. 

SEPARATE VERSUS JOINT ELECTORATES. 

The Mahaaabha has a fandamental objection to separate 
electorates but desires it to be particularly noted that the 
scheme of separate electorate was devised for the protection 
of a minority community. A community w'hich is in 
majority in any province is not, therefore, legitimately enti- 
tled to demand separate electorates. A minority community 
should be given the right to demand joint electorates with 
the majority community, should it consider it needful for 
its protection, irrespective of the consent thereto of the 
majority community. In such circumstances, the seats for 
the minority community may be reserved in Joint electorates 
on the basis of their proportion in the population of the 
province and the community should be given the right to 
contest additional seats. 

fundamental RIGHTS, 

(a) The Hindu Mahasabha stands for making provision 
in the constitution for full protection of the different 
cultures, religions, languages, scripts and personal laws of 
the different minorities. 

(bj As for civic and economic rights, none shall be 
prejudiced by reason of his caste or creed in acquiring or 
enjoying those rights which should expressly include the 
rights of owing, purchasing, or disposing of landed proper- 
ties in the open market without any restrictions of any 



304 


kind whatsoever and the freedom of choice of any profession 
or calling. All laws existing at present in India based on 
caste discriminations and acting prejudicially to the enjoy- 
ment of these rights should automatically lapse. 

(c) That DO person shall be under any disability for 
admission to any branch of public service merely by 
reason of bis religion or caste. 

(d) Membership of any community or caste or creed 
should not prejudice any person for purposes of recruitment 
to public services or be a ground for non-admission, pro- 
motion or supersession in any public service or to any 
public institution. 

PUBLIC SERVICES. 

There should be no communal representation in the 
Public services which must be open to all communities on 
the basis of merit and competency ascertained through open 
competitive tests. Recruitment to Services should be 
made on considerations of highest efdctency and qualifications 
neccessary and available for any particular service by open 
competition, thereby securing the two-fold object of 
maintaining the services on a high level of efficiency and 
leaving open a fair field of competition to all communities 
to secure fair representation on the basis of merit and effi* 
ciencyv The public services constitute the fodl of self- 
Qovernment. It will not be safe to have less efficiency in 
administration, than at least what prevails under British 
responsibility, Considerations, therefore, ^ of maintaining 
efficiency in administration at the highest possible standard 



305 


make it obligator^^ to demand the highest necessary qualifi- 
cations requisite for any particular service from those who 
offer themselves for recruitment to public services, irrespec- 
tive of caste and creed. 

PROBLEM OF DEPRESSED CLASSES. 

It is purely a domestic question of the Hindu Society 
based, as it is, on the Hindu custom of untouchability and 
unapproachability. Of late there has come upon the 
Hindus’ mind a vast change which is striking at the very 
root of the custom by throwing open temples to the so-caUed 
depressed classes. 

The best solution of the problem which is also least 
offensive to constitutional purity in reservation of seats for 
them is Joint Electorates with the Hindus on the basis of 
their proportion in the population. 

What is needed is fixation of the definition of the term 
depressed classes to untouchability and unapproachability 
and then to ascertain in each province as to which of the 
caste should be included in the Depressed classes. 

THE POONA PACT AND THE PUNJAB HINDUS 

The Hindus of the Punjab have always contended that 
there is no depressed classes problem in the Punjab on 
account of several factors operating against the custom of 
untouchability, such as the Arya Samaj movement, the ^ikh 
movement and Reform movements amongst the Hindus. This 
contention of the Hindus was supported by the Locfal 
Government and the Government of India. The Communal 
decision accordingly on the support of the Government of 



306 


India tefoaed to ereato depreaaed claaaes qaestion io the Pun* 
jab but unfortunately, owing to the fast of Mahatma Gandhi 
and the natural anxiety of the people to asTe bia life, the 
Poona Pact was hurried through. The Poona Pact should, 
therefore, be amended ao far as the Punjab question ia con- 
cerned to restore the status quo ante.” 

Another statement of the Hindu Mahasabha on 
the constitutional problem of India was submitted at 
the same time to the Joint Parliamentary Select 
Committee in London. It deals with the pledges 
given by His Majesty's Government at various time.s 
for introducing Responsible Government in India. 
It then puts forth the views of the Hindu Mahasabha 
in the following words: — 

When the White Paper is studied and analyzed, 
certain points stand out which enable the people to 
visualise that there is no improvement in their constitutional 
status and that what ia provided in the proposals of the 
White Paper is mere increased association of ths people 
with the Government of the country for which, in its es- 
sence, it is the British Crown through its Agents and not 
the people that are responsible. Some of the most important 
of these points are pieced together briefly in the resolution 
adopted at the Joint Conference of the Members of the 
Working Committee of the Hindu Mahisajbha and the 
Hindu Members of the Central Legislature with which the 
Hindu Mahasabha is in entire agreemeat 

The resolution ia as follows : — 



307 


This Conference put« on record its deliberate opinion 
that the constitution of India as foreshadorred in the White 
Paper will not allay but increase discontent as beins; meat 
disappointing and inadequate and even retrogressive for 
the following reasons : — 

(a) That there is no advance in the constitutioual 
status of India and whole of the conception of the constitu- 
tion is based on the assumption that India is a conquered 
territory belonging to the Grown of England and is to be 
ad ministered > not in the interest of India^ by the agents of the 
Crown> 

(b) That the constitution does not even remotely or 
in any sense approximate to a Dominion Constitution which 
the Government is pledged to grant by Parliamentary 
declarations* 

(c) That though it was agreed that the introduction of 
Central Responsibility leading to Dominion Status should 
be accompanied during a period of transition by safeguards 
which should be demonstrably in the interest of India^ tbe 
period of transition is not provided nor it is fixed and the 
safeguards are not conceived in the interest of India* 

(d) That the Central Responsibility is made dependent 
on the one hand, ultimately on the will of the Princes and on 
the otbeff on the World economic conditions making the 
establishment of the Reserved Bank possible and on its suc- 
cessful working and also more particularly on the will of the 
Houses of Parliament to present an addresss, if and when 
they so choose to His Majesty praying for His Majesty’s pro- 
clamation announcing the establishtnent of the Federation. 



308 


(e) That ' provisioB has been made for endowing the 
Governor-General fvith extra-ordinary powers described 
under the categories called : (a) Reserved Departments (b) 
Special Eesponsibilitiee (c) Discretionary Powers (d) Special 
powers and (e) Legislative powers by which the Governor- 
General can make acts without the consent of or even 
reference to Legislatures and can obtain funds at his own 
individual judgment and will. 

(f J That the authority of the Governor-General to appoint 
Counsellors for the adminietration of Reserved Departments 
of Defence and Foreign affairs is not limited choice of bis 
Counsellors only from amongst the elected members of the 
Legislatures. 

(g) That the Federal Legislatures have been denied the 
power of constituting a Railway Board by a statute of its 
own for the administration of the Federal Rlys. 

(b) That the responsibility of the Finance Minister al- 
read;^ circumscribed as it is by making more than eighty 
percent of the revenues non-votable has been further serious- 
ly crippled by the appointment of a Financial Adviser to the 
Viceroy. 

(i) That no provision has been made for complete Indian- 
isation of the Army within a reasonable period. 

(j) That powers are still retained in regard to the recruit* 
ment and control of Public Service, the Police Service and 
other Services, by the Secretary of State for India, which 
being the steel-frame of the constitution are incapable of 
automitic adjustment compatible with automatic constitution- 
al growth, 



309 

(k) That DO provision has been made for automatic 
growth to Dominion Constitution* 

(\) That fundamental riehta have not been defined and 
no provision has been made for the inclusion of those rights 
in Constitution Act, and that in view of the fact that these 
alone comprise the true and legitimate protection of a 
minority, this omission coupled with practically autocratic 
powers of the Governor^General is bound to lead to differen- 
tial treatment of minorities in different provinces. * 

(m) That the Government reserves to itself the right to 
reconsider the whole position in respect of Reforms under 
certain possible but undefined financial, economic and politi- 
cal conditions, even though all other requirements for the 
inauguration of the Federation shall have been satisfied. 

(n) That the Communal Award which forms the basis of 
structure of the Constitution is predominently pro-Moslem 
and highly unjust to the Hindus. It is unacceptable to the 
Hindus as it provides for separate electorates and undue 
weightages in representation in Legislatures to the Moslems 
at the cost of the Hindus and gives statutory majority in 
effect to the Moslems in the Punjab. 

To the above the Mabasabba would add that a Consti- 
tution based on the Communal decision of the British 
Government cannot be one of Dominion Status, nor can it 
ever lead to it. It would always be an unstirmountable 
obstacle to redeem their pledges thereof. 

The Mahasabha has therefore to criticise the Commnnal 
decision also apart from its adverse effects on the interests 
of the Hindu Community^ 



BIO 


Bhai Parmanand on behalf of the Hindu Maha 
Sabha convened a meeting of the Hindu, Sikh and 
Parsi members of the Central Legislatures at Simla in 
Sept. 1983. 

A statement with the signatures of Syts. Sukhraj 
Roy, (Rai Bahadur), Amarnath Butt, Bhupat Singh, 
Raghubir Singh, (Rai Bahadur), Chandi Mai Gola, Bhai 
Parmanand, Satyendranath Sen, S. G. Jog, G. N. 
Mujumdar^ Gupteshwar Prasad Singh, B. L. Rastogi, 
N. R. Gunjal, M. C. Rajha (Rao Bahadur), Lalchand 
Navalrai b. i., Patil ( e. b. ), Liladhar Chaudhari, 
B. N. Misra, B. Das and N. N. Ankleseria was sub- 
mitted to the Joint Select Committee in London. 

BHAI PARMANANDA S EVIDENCE 

Shri Bhai Parmananda who also went to London, 
submitted the following statement on behalf of the 
Central Hindu Committee of the Central Legislatures. 

THE HINDUS AND THE COMMUNAL 
SETTLEMENT 

While fully supportiog^ the view that the reapooaibility 
given to the Central or to the Provincial Leglalaturee haa 
been placed under so many restrictions as to reduce it to a 
mere name, and that the safeguards with reservation of power 
to the Governor-General and the Governors under the name 
of ‘‘special r6«pon8ibilities^\ “discretionary powera’’, Govet- 
nor-Generars powers of issuing ordinances md enacting 



311 


special acl0, etc., take away the spirit of respODsibility 
leavinii: only the form behind, 1 have to aabmit that the 
chief subject which I propose to deal with is the grave 
wrong done to the Hindus by the settlement of the 
communal problem, commonly known as the Prime Minis- 
ter’s Award, and by the apportionment of seats in the 
Legislatures to various communities, as outlined in the 
White Paper. 

WRONG PROCEDURE ADOPTED IN ARRIVING 
AT A SOLUTION OF THE COMMUNAL PROBLEM 
BY MUTUAL AGREEMENT. 

It was a wrong assumption, based upon a fallacious 
theory, that the communal problem ol India could be 
settled by mutual agreement among the various communi- 
ties and diverse interests, and farther that the settlement 
was intimately connected with the question of Hindu- 
Moslem unity. 

The Hindus and Moslems having entirely different ideals 
as to their future growth and development, it was no use 
mixing up the settlement of communal issues and the Hindu- 
Moslem unity or any agreement dependent' upon it. Un- 
fortunately, however, the discussions in the Bound Table 
Conference centered round the question of the unity of 
various communities and it assumed an unusualimportance 
during the Second Round Table Conference, which was 
attended by Mahatma GandhL To achieve this unity was 
a passion with him and, to that extent, it proved to be a 
source of weakness. Hindu-Moslem concord, taken by 



312 


ifcself, is an excellent thing; but as understood in Indian 
politics^ it has led to untoward consequences. 

The Congress, in its struggle to achieve 8elf*govern- 
ment, has run into the habit of calling this struggle a war. 
For the purposes of war, of course, conplete unity among 
different parties is essential. And, in order to secure that 
unity the leaders of the Congress had been offering higher 
terms to the Mohammedans without properly considering how 
those terms would affect the Hindus But to understand 
the matter aright it is necessary to know that this struggle 
is not a war in its literal sense and the grant of 8elf*govern> 
ment to India, whether due to the growth of a new feeling 
of humanity in Britain, or due to pressure brought to bear 
upon the British Government by various modes of agitation 
including the recent Civil Disobedience movement, could 
not but be in the nature of a gift to India by England. It 
is true that even to force England to give India self- 
government, unity among the various communities would be 
a great help, but it could not be an essential condition. 

COMMDNAL CONSTITUTION, A NEGATION OF 
DEMOCRACY. 

It is acknowledged on all hands that democratic consti- 
tution must be fr«*e from the virus of communalfsm. It can 
be said with all certainty that no coniti|utlon which is 
based upon entirely different, and very often mutually 
opposed interests, could lead to the growth of a truly 
national government. The full force of this argument has 
been perceived by everyone who has had to study the 



313 


communal problem in India. The authors of the Montague* 
Chelmsford Report discussing th«s subject come to the 
following conclusion : — 

“We conclude unhesitatingly that the history of self- 
government among the nations who developed it and spread 
it throughout the world is decisively against the admission 
by the State of any divided allegiance against the State’s 
airanging its members in any way which encourages them 
to think of themselves primarily as citizens of any smaller 
unit than itself The communal system stereotypes exis- 

ting relations. We regard any system of communal elec- 
torates as a very serious hindrance to the development of 
the self-governing principle,” 

The Statutory Commission supported the above view 
thus : — 

“Communal representation— the provision by law that 
a particular religious community shall be represented in 
a popular legislature solely by members of its own body 
with a guarantee as to how many communal seats there 
shall be — is an undoubted obstacle in the way of the 
growth of a common citizenship.” 

The Prime Minister again expressed the absurdity of 
communal electorates by saying that : — 

“The evil of communal electorates has assumed its 
most dangerous form and proportion in India, where dif- 
ferent communities and minorities are out to claim that 
the legislature is to represent not regions, but religions, 
not areas or interests, but castes and creeds, by a strange 



314 


electoral system based on the grouping of voters by 
religion in separate eommunal electorates.’’ 

And, moreover, in explaining this complicated question 
to the House of Commons, he said : — 

'^This is one of the problems which ' has to be faced 
because, if India is going to develop robust political life, 
there must be room for national political parties based 
upon conceptions of India’s interests and not upon concep- 
tions regarding the well-being that is smaller or less 
comprehensive than the whole of India.” 

Sir Austen Chamberlain, representing the British 
Government in the Minorities Committee of the League of 
Nations, said : — 

“It was certainly not the intention of those, who bad 
devised the system of minorities’ protection, to establish 
in the midst of a nation a community which would remain 
permanently estranged from national life. The object of 
the Minorities Treaties was to secure fco the minorities that 
measure of protection and justice which would gradually 
prepare them to merge in the great national community to 
which they belonged.” 

THE DUTY OF THE GOVERNMENT. 

Under the circumstances and for the reasons mentioned 
above the only right course for the British Government 
was to chalk out a truly national constitution for India 
witboat piyiffg any heed to the claims put forth by the 
communally •minded leaders of the various communities; or 



to follow the general principles laid down by the Minori- 
ties Committee of the League of Nations for the guidance 
of various Governments in communal matters. 

Failing that, the next best coarse for the Government 
was to discover a uniform plan and to follow it strictly in 
the matter of distribution of communal rights. Scrupulcus 
impartiality was the one thing to be expected from the 
Government in this case. Unfortunately what we find is 
that the proposed constitution emphasises and accentuates 
comrounalism above everything else and not only accedes 
to the communal demands, but gives every encouragement 
to communalism by putting a premium over it, as the 
proposals in the White Paper show. 

THE STATUTORY COMMISSION’S OPINION ON THIS 
SUBJECT— AUTHENTIC AND UNBIASSED. 

The Statutory Commission was appointed by Parliament 
in 1^27, in pursuance of Section 84a of the Government of 
India Act. The Commission carried on their task of 
investigation in India in co-operation with the Committees 
appointed from the Central and the Provincial Legislatures. 
Among other things the question of communal represent- 
ation was enquired into. And naturally their unanimous 
view based on a thorough examination of the question on the 
spot should carry weight and authority. The first question 
before them was that of communal representation which 
they call most important and highly controversial. We 
know what view they had. But in spite of that they 
decided in favour of maintaining separate representation. 



316 


And why so ? They give their reason in the following 
words 2 — 

‘*We are now faced, as tb^ anthora of the Montague- 
Chelmsford Report were faced, by the indisputable fact 
that the Mohammedan community aa a whole is not prepared 
to give up communal representation and would regard its 
abolition, without the assent of that community, not only 
as the withdrawal of a security which it prizes but as a 
cancelling of assurances upon which it has relied/’ 

Having a consctousoaaa that the responsibility of 
retaining communal electorates lay on the Mohammedan 
community, the Statutory Commission took a fair and 
unbiassed view of the subject. They did not try to dis- 
cover any new rule for their guidance in the settlement 
of the Hiodu'Moslem question. They took the Lucknow 
Pact and followed the lines of that agreement arrived at 
between the Hindu and Moslem leaders in 1916, when 
communal tension had not been replaced by good-will. 

Eeferring to the most disputed problem of the allocation 
of seats to different communities in Bengal and the Punjab, 
they say with great reason and truth : — 

But a claim has been put forward for a guarantee of 
Mohammedan representation which goes further than this... 
^This claim goes to the length of seeking to preserve the 
full security of representation now provided for Moslems 
in these six provinces and at the same time to enlarge in 
Bengal and the Punjab the present proportton of seats 
secured to the community by separate electorates to 



317 


Bguree pr'>portionate to their ratio of population. Thia 
would give Mohammedans a fixed and unalterable majoffty 
of the general constituency seats in both proTinces. We 
cannot go so far. The continuance of the present scale of 
weightage in the six provinces could not — in the absence 
of a new general agreement between the communities" 
equitably be combined with so great a departure from the 
existing allocation of seats in Bengal and the Punjab. 

The Communal Award disregards all this and goes to the 
length of giving ^ore than a mere statutory majority to the 
Mohammedans in the Punjab. 

THE CONTRAST BETWEEN TBE WHITE PAPER 
AND THE STATUTORY COMMISSION AS REGARDS 
ALLOCATION OF SEATS IN THE CENTRAL 
ASSEMBLY 

The Statutory Commission allotted seats to various 
communities in the proposed Federal Assembly in the 
following proportion: fixing the total number of seats at 
250, they assigned 160 seats to the Hindus (including the 
Dt^pressed Classes), 75 to the Mohammedans and 25 to the 
other communities. Thus the Hindus get 60 per cent 
(15 per cent less than their population ratio) and the 
Mohammedans get 30 per cent of the total (5 per cent more 
than their population ratio). The White Paper allocates 
150 instead of 150 seats to Hindus (including the Depressed 
Classes) and 82 to Mohammedans. Thue it reduces the 
Hindu majority (75 per cent, of the whole population) to 
a minority by giving them a representation of 42 per cent 



318 


The coitipafative allo»‘ation of seats as proposed in tbe 
Statutory Oommiaaion’a Report, the GovernmeDt of India 
Despatch and the White Paper is t — 





Percent- 


Europe- 




age of 


aos. 


Bin- 

Mos- 

Hindu 

Sikhs 

Anglo- 


due 

Icms 

to 


Indians 




Moslem 


and 




seats 


Xtians 

Statutory 



I 

[per cent. 

1 


Commission 

150 

75 

I 33*0 

1 5 

17 

Govt, of India 



! 



Despatch ... 

186 

76 

1 36'7 

5 

20 

White Paper 

105 

H2 j 

1 

i 44'0 

6 

20 


Special 
Constituen- 
cies (Com- 
merce, 
Labour, 
Women and 
Landlord?) 


37* 


* These special seats have been taken out of tbe Bindu 
seats ^General Constituency) reducing their percentage from 
60 per cent., according to the Simon Commission, to 42 per 
cent of the total by the White Paper. 


THE INIQUITIES OF THE COMMUNAL AWARD 

(aj The Communal Award is iniquitous because it gives 
a statutory majority to the majority community in the Pun- 
jab to an extent which is beyond the expectations of even 
tile Moslem leaders of the Province, thereby establishing a 
fixed and unalt«>rable religious statutory majority wHich 
could not be reduced by any appeal to tbe electorate in the 
Provinti. Fixing th© total number at 17B, tbe White Paper 
give# 86 to Mhbammedans, 43 to Hindus and 32 to Sikhs, 



319 


i. e., 11 more than that of the Hindus and Sikhs combined. 
Adding 10 seats of Special Constituencies five more would 
go to Mohammedans, thus making their total 91 and of all 
the rest 84. With such a strong statutory communal majo- 
rity in the Punjab Council the Governor, even with his 
special powers, would not be in a position to protect the 
minorities, because in the face of opposition from this majo- 
rity he would not be able to form an alternative government. 
Thus '‘freed from this contingency and sheltered by the 
citadel of religious orthodoxy the majority might easily 
become a veritable engine of oppression and misrule against 
which the combined opposition would be impotent.’^ 

(b) In other provinces special weightage is given to 
Moslem minorities. In the United Provinces for instances, 
the Moslems forming 14 per cent, of the population are 
given as many as half of the nunaber of Hindu seats in the 
Upper Chamber. On the other hand the Hindus in the 
Pui^jab, a minority community in the province, instead of 
being given any weightage get less than even their popu- 
lation ratio. 

(c) The Punjab being the main recruiting ground and 
a source of supply of 62 per cent recruits to the army of 
defence, the Moslem Government of the Punjab would exer- 
cise an entire control over this source 

(d) The creation of a separate deficit province of Sind, 
with a population of less than four millions and the introduc- 
tion* of full-fledged reforms in the North-West Frontier 
Province, With a population of two and a half millions and 
each necessitating a subvention of nearly a crore of rupees 



320 


at the coat of the poor people of India, cannot surely be 
called measures of protection for the minorities. On the 
other band the Corbett scheme of creating a new province 
consisting of the Ambala Division of the Punjab, together 
with some districts of the U. P., which could have served 
as a solution for the most difficult problem of the Punjab 
and which is keenly desired by the people of the Ambala 
Division, was altogether ignored. 

(e) Such enormous communal concessions have created 
anomalies like the followingi^ 

The backward population of the North-West Frontier 
Province iraintaining their administration at a heavy cost 
to the Central Revenue ere given five seats, i. e., less than 
half a million people of that Province return one member 
to the Federal Assembly While an advanced province 
like Bengal, with a population of over 50 millions, is given 
37 seats Only, which works out at one member to one and 
half million people. This is three times the number of 
persons represented by one member of the Federal Assembly 
in the case of the North-West Frontier Province, 

Bhaiji did not rest with this much only. Im- 
mediately after assuming the Presidentship of the 
Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha at Ajmer in 
Oct., 1933 he undertook an all India tour. He visited 
important towns in all the provinces of Hindnsthan, 
i. a. Agra and Oudh, Bihar, Bengal, Bombay Presi- 
dency, Maharashtra, the N. W. F. Province and the 
Punjab. In Maharashtra Province, Dr. B. S. Moohje 



321 


and Sjt. R. (jr. Bhidey also joined him. In almost all 
the cities, mass meetings of the Hindus were held and 
unanimous resolutions condemning the so-called 
Ooinmnnal Award were passed, texts of which were 
communicated to the Grovernment and to the Joint 
Parliamentary Committee. 

Besides this a draft resolution protesting 'against 
the Communal Award was got printed and the signa- 
tures of the Hindu members of the various Provincial 
Legislatures, JJlunicipal Boards and other local bodies 
were obtained and forwarded to tlie Joint ParliHiuen- 
tary Committee and to the British Government in 
London. 


PANDIT MALAVIYAJI IN THE FIELD 

R. B. Mehr Chand Khanna organised a Frontier 
Provincial Hindu Conference which was held at Pesha- 
war in 1934, to express the resentment of the Frontier 
Hindus against the Communal Award. Besides Bhai 
Parmanand, Dr. Radha Kumud Muke:pjee and Pandit 
M. M. Malaviya attended the Conference. This pro- 
vided an opportunity for the Hindu Sabha leaders to 
discuss the Award thoroughly with Panditjee. 

Panditjee was even moved to tears and was crm vert- 
ed to an attitude of strong opposition to the Commu- 
nal Decision. He in collaboration with Sjt. M. R. 
Aney tried liis best to bring round the Congress to 



322 


liis view but failing in his attempt, he formed a separate 
party under the name of ‘the Congress Nationalist 
Party’ in order to work in co-operation with the Hindu 
Mahasabha, Panditji’s party fought the last elections 
against the Congress on the issup of the Communal 
Award. 

Dur^g 1934-35, thei’e were held some All-India 
Anti-Communal Award Conferences. The first Con- 
ference was held on Oct. 25, 1934 at Bombay under 
the Presidentship of Shri B. Ramaiiand Chatterjee, an 
ex-President of the A. I, Hindu Mahasabha and the 
second at Delhi on Feb. 23, 1935 under the President- 
ship of Mr. C. Y. Chintamani, the well-known Editor 
of the ‘Leader’. 

In the Punjab, a minority Conference was orga- 
nised by the Punjab Hindu Sabha leaders. It was 
held under the Presidentship of Mr. K. L. Ralia Ram, 
a respected Christian leader. The late Sardar Bahadur 
Mehtab Singh was the Chairman of the Reception 
Committee. Dr. B. S. Moonje, Bhai Parmanand 
and Raja Narindra Nath took a leading part in the 
Conference. 

Resolutions on behalf of the minorities (Hindus, 
Sikhs, Christians, Parsis, etc.) of the Punjab condemn- 
ing the Communal Award were passed and communi- 
cated to the. British Government. 



323 


WHY WE FAILED ? 

The Government’s Communal Award, as we now 
see, has not come up to the expectations of any non- 
Muslim Community in India and yet all this agitation 
carried on with such earnestness by the All India 
Hindu Mahasabha, having the good of the country at 
heart, seems to have gone in vain. All our reasoning 
and appeal to the sense of justice and equity of the 
British statesmen have so for fallen on deaf ears. 
The reasons for this failure are not far to seek. In the 
first place the British Government has its own defi- 
nite aims and policy to follow in this country. They 
cared neither for the so-called ‘Swaraj War’ waged 
by the Indian National Congress nor for the discord- 
ant cry of the Hindus, who are disunited and a major 
portion of whom are still being obsessed by the 
false philosophy of the Congress Nationalism. The 
Hindu Sabha agitation against the Communal Award 
roused the people of India, specially the Hindus as 
a whole but the Congress following a double-faced 
policy turned it to its own favour. Apparently the 
Congress seemed to all an enemy of the Constitution 
as it gave solemn pledges to their electorates that its 
sole aim was nothing less than to break the Consti- 
tution. But in their heart of hearts the Congress 
people wanted to work the Constitution and thereby 
to gain more power to carry out their own theory, by 



324 


their poliw of ‘neither o.cceptmg nor rejecting* tlie 
Communal iVward, of pleasing the Muslims at the cost of 
the Hindus. The Gov eminent knew it. Unfortunately 
the Oonimunal nature of the Constitution has all along 
been the main and essential part of the British Policy. 

HOSTILITY OF CONGRESS 

The Congress has acted as an abettor, consciously 
of unconsciouly, in this clever move of the British 
statesmen. The great reason of our failure, and which 
is more regretable, is the deliberate indifference and 
hostility of the Indian National Congress towards our 
struggle against the Communal Award. 

The strange part of the affair is that the Hindus 
for whose very existence the Hindu Mahasabha took up 
the cause could not or did not distinguisli between 
a friend and a foe and that is why the Government 
treated the agitation very lightly. All the same the 
Hindu Mahasablia lias not lost all hope. Their cause 
is just; they are sure to win. “We do not grudge, 
them their victory because though we were vanquish- 
ed in the fields yesterday, enough fight is still left iu 
us to-day. We have not given up the struggle for 
lost. Nay, we have already returned to the charge”. 






THE FUNDS AND THE 


FHOFEHTBES 

The Hindu Maliasablia has never commanded 
riches although some of the wealthiest men are its 
sympathisers and patrons. Their corporate wealth has 
dwindled down to zero so far as the activities of the 
Hindu MahasaHia are concerned. 

There are absolutely no reserved funds or other 
funds in hand for carrying on the objects of the Hindu 
Maliasablia on a stable and permanent buvsis. During 
tlie early years of its establishment sufficient funds 
came and were spent. Men like Pandit M. M. Mala- 
viya and Lala Lajpat Rai used to collect funds and 
used to spend very liberally as well. They did not 
think of, it appears, creaticg a permanent reserve fund. 
A huge amount of funds was spent for starting three 
daily papers. The Hindustan Times (English), Tej 
(Urdu) and Arjun (Hindi^ were started by the Maha- 
sabha leaders which owing to the lack of control 
became independent in the course of time. These 
Journals now feel shy of propagating the gospels of 
the Hindu Mahasabha. 

The martyrdom of Swami Shraddhanand gave an 
opportunity to collect funds. About Rs. Three Lakhs 



were collected and the Hindu Maliasablia crea^^ed a 
separate trust for its working. At present there is 
over a Lakh of rupees and it has been saved and kept 
as reserve funds due to strenuous and constant efforts 
of Shri Bhai Parrnanandji and Dr. B. S. Moonje wlio 
are also the trustees of the Funds. According to the 
resolution by which the Shraddliand Memorial Trust 
was constituted, one fourth of the income of the Trust 
was to be spent through the Hindu Mahasabha for 
Hindu Sangathan work. But this one fourth share of 
the income has never been handed over by the Shraddha- 
nand Memorial TrUvSt to the Hindu Mahasabha so far 
for the Sangathan work. 

The death of Lala F^ajpat Rai afforded another 
occasion for raising a permanent fund. Dr. B. S. 
Moonje, the then Working President of] the Hindu 
Mahasabha succeeded in collecting about Rs. 50,000/- 
for the Lajpat Rai Memorial Fund. 

In 1926 Ij. Lajpat Rai transfeiTed the Head Office 
of the Hindu Mahasabha from Benares to Delhi. Up- 
to the presidentsliip of Shri Bhai Parmauandji in 
193B the Head Office was being kept in a small rented 
second storejmd building on the Punchkui .1 Road. 
* This was below the dignity of the Hindu Mali iabha. 
Bhai Parmanand wanted to find out some place for 
the building of an Ashram where workers fi»r the 
Hindu Sangathan work could be trained. 





irain 


329 


Taking into consideration the stability of the 
institution and the safety of the investment the sum 
of Rupees 60,000/- was also used in the Mahasabha 
building. The building of Hindu Mahasabha Bhawan 
could not have been completed but for the munifi- 
cence of Seth Jugal Kishore Birla who has so far 
donated over Rs. 40,000/-. Shri Bhaiji has collected 
about Rs. 20,000/- for the Hindu Sewa Ashram. For 
the maintenance of the Ashram Shri Bhaiji donated his 
one hundred slilares of the Punjab Sugar Mills which 
were t’.ien of t ie inxrket value of Rs. 35,0 JO/- aid of 
the annual income of Rs. 4000/- through the Hindu 
Maha Sabha at the Ajmer Session. A separate trust 
has been created for this purpose. 

A grand palatial building is now standing over a 
ridge which commands the view of the wliole of New 
Delhi. It stands as a permanent monument in the 
Capital of Hiiidusthan. It has now become a place 
of daily pilgrimage for hundreds of Hindus without 
any distinction of caste and creed whatsoever. 

The Mahasabha has very few donors who donate 
for the current expenses of its programme of work, 
but the name of Seth Jugal Kishore Birla is an excep- 
tion to this statement. 

Shri V eer V . D. Savarkar is now contemplating 
very seriously to collect funds for a Reserve fund to 
enable the Mahasabha to put up a solid work. 



380 


Some of the Provincial Hindu Sabhas have also 
got properties. The Punjab Hindu Sabha for instance 
has got a property worth about Rs. 2 Lakhs with an 
annual income of about Rs. 3000/-. This income 
meets the organization expenses of the Punjab Hindu 
Sabha. 

In the Bihar province as well the Hindu Sabha 
has got its own building which was purchased at the 
cost of Rs. 8000/- advanced by Seth Jugal Kishore 
Birla. 

In Bengal Shri Seth Jugal Kishore Birla has got 
constructed a number of temples at the cost of Lakhs 
of rupees for which separate trusts have been created. 
Some prominent members of the Hindu Sabha are on 
the trusts that manage the properties. 

In the last earthquake in Bihar Rs. One Lakh were 
spent through the Hindu Mahasabha for the repair of 
temples which were damaged. This amount of One 
I.akh was also donated by Shri Seth Jugal Kishore 
Birla. 



OUR 





OUR IMAT80RA.L FLAG 


As a frontispiece of this book our readers shall 
find a beautiful illustration of our ‘Hindu National 
Flag.’ The conception of it came from the versatile 
brain of Swatantrya Yir V. D. Savarkar. For the 
first time he propounded the idea and explained it in 
details in the famous journal “Slmaddhanand” edited, 
by Dr. N. D. Savarkar. 

Many considerations have been borne in mind 
when he took up the task of determining the Flag of 
the Hindu Nation. The earth that feeds society, the 
law that' gives nourishment, the book that imparts 
wisdom, the spinning wheel which sj^mbolises arts 
and crafts — all these and many others can become 
symbols and much can be said in respect of each of 
them. But the crowning representative of all these 
symbols — the only correct symbol of Abhyudaya 
is sword And in this symbol all other sym- 

bols are represented. The main symbol for the Hindu 
National Flag therefore should be the sword 

But the ultimate aim of the Hindu Abhymdaya 
is Nishreyas and keeping this in view the 

Hindus should endeavour to reach the highest goal 

I 



334 


humanly possible wliich is the special characteristies 
of the Hindu Nation. 

Hindus have perfected a science based on experi- 
ment which can be termed as the highest blessing on 
human life. This Sliastra is called the Yoga 

It is tlie highest means of the full development 
of man s internal powers. It is therefore very 
necessary that a clear symbol of Yoga which 

indicates the way to the highest bliss should be fixed 
on the Flag of the Hindu Nation. 

This Symbol is that of the Kundalini It 

is not the characteristic of any particular Jati (3*Tf?r) or 
Varna ( to ). It exists in all human beings. On 
both sides of the Merudanda ( Spinal cord ), 

there are two nadis ( nerves ) which are named by 
the Hindu Yogashastris as the Ida km and the Pingala 
ftfTiT. They are intertwined with each other like a 
garland. Between these two there is a third nadi 
called the Susumna In them there are centres 

of nerves which are designated as lotuses in the 
Yogic language. 

There are chiefly six-lotuses, known as the 
Muladhara ( ) the Swadhisthana the 

Manipura the Anahata the Vishudha 

and the Sahasrara In the Muladhara chakra 

MSR there is a marvellous power which is coiled up. 
By Yogic and meditative practices it gets awakened 



335 


and passing through every lotus ( nerve centre ) and 
experiencing wonderful psychic super human ex- 
perience reaches the Sahasrara lotus. Then the person 
practising Yoga experiences wonderfully supersensuous 
and intense joy and bliss. This stage is designated by 
the Yogis as that of Kaivalj^ananda by the 

Yajrayanis as that of Mahasukha by the Adwai- 

tees as that of Brahmananda and by 

devotees as that of Parmananda To 

acquire this supreme joy or bliss is the highest ideal 
of man, be he a Hindu or a non-Hindu ( Muslim, 
Christian or Jew ) i. e. believer or non-believer, citizen 
or forester. This Yogashastra is a science of personal 
experience. Hence there is no place for difference of 
opinions. Therefore the Kundalini which is the 
Muladharya Shakti of man’s highest progress and 
eternally blissful state of superconsciousness which 
can be intuitively experienced can alone be the symbol 
of the great ideal at which the Abhyudaya of 

the Hindu Nation aims. 

Thus the Kundalini which represents all 

the ultimate aspirations, feelings, and powers of 
mankind and the sword fi which represents the all- 
sided Abhyudaya aiming at and leading to the nation’s 
ideal prosperity — these two alone, being depicted on 
the National flag, will be able to indicate and inspire 
the ideals of Abhyudaya and Nisshreyas. 



336 


Our National Flag thus will represent the Kunda- 
lini, the Kripana ( sword ) — the one representing the 
highest bliss, the other wordly prosperity; they 
combine Shanti and Shakti Yoga and 

Bhoga Nivritti and Pravitti Dhyeya 

and Dharana the one symbolizes 

highest spiritual attainment, the other denotes 

( worldly advancement ); the former reminds 
one of Lord Krishna, the latter of Dhanurdhara 

Partha of the dim Geeta: The Kundalini 

means Jnyana Yoga and the Kripan means 

Karmayoga 

‘^For the protection of the good and the destruc- 
tion of the wicked.” 

g^T4T:, m 

‘ All this, whatever that moves in the world, does 
so, because it is indwelt by the Lord. Enjoy thou 
what He has alloted to thee.” 

This is the Univ^ersal message of our Hindu 
National Flag to the world. This is the national 
declaration. 

In order that kingdom, power and glory may not 
become polluted by the actions of tyranny and in 
Order to keep the central truth of virtuous conduct 



337 


always before mankind the background of this Hindu 
Flag is made of Red orchard colour. This is 

the colour of renunciation. There is no Tyaga 
without Yoga and Kshema Therefore the 

Kripana is for the Yoga Kshema We not only 

want to become ourselves free, powerful and liberated 
but we want also to make the world so. Therefore 
the colour of the flag of prosperity is Bhagwa. The 
deeper meaning and the philosophic secret of the 
Hindu Flag is thus denoted by this Bhagwa-zanda 
which is adorned by the kundlini with Omkar 

and which also holds the Kripana. 

This Flag is the final stage in the evolution of the 
traditional Hindu Flag in the past. This is the 
consummation and perfection. From the very ancient 
times, the colour of the Hindu Flag has been Bhagwa. 
Even today the ‘zanda’ indicating the ideas of victori- 
ous Pravritti and Blissful Nivritti is seen 

always and everywhere on the Hindu temples. 

Even at the time of our last triumphal efforts when 
Hindu Pad Padshahi ( ) routed and over- 
threw the Muslims, this very Bhagwa Flag was adopted 
as our National Flag, bestowed by Guru Samarth Ram 
Dass upon our National-Hero, Shri Shivaji Maharaj. 

Along with the Royal Bhagwa colour of the 
Maharastreeya Hindu Power, there is also the 
Kripaii of the Sikh indicative of tlie memory of Guru 



338 


Govind Singh, another great protector of the Hindu 
nation. Guru Govind Singh used to keep two 
Kripanas by his side and used to say, “The one is of 
Yoga and the other is of Bhoga, the one is of 5iTf% 
(eternal peace) and the other is of (prosperity).” 

Then there stands prominent the Onkar the 

sacred name of the Great One — an inexhaustible 
spiritual Dynamo, ever pure and source of all our 
Activity and Bliss. But to crown all our efforts with 
victory and to guarantee our all round national welfare 
there is the Symbol of Swastika — embracing all that 
is good and denoting the continuity of Hindu culture. 

The Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha in its 18th 
Session held at Lahore in 1936 duly recognised this 
Flag — with the following resolution : — 

“The Mahasabha resolves that the Hindu National 
Flag expressing the central idea of Hindu National- 
ism and spirituality be adopted as the Pan-Hindu 
National Flag.” 

LONG LIVE OUR NATIONAL FLAG. 






SHRI PT. MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA 


Presided in 1923 & 1935. 


Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya comes of an ortho- 
dox and respected family of Brahmans, who origi- 
nally belonged to Malwa. One of his ancestors mi- 
grated from Malwi3; to Allahabad nearly 400 years ago. 
The family has produced renowned Sanskrit scholars. 
He was born at Allahabad on 25th December 1861. 
Malaviyaji has burning zeal for the Hindu cause from 
the very beginning of his public career. Although he 
took prominent part in the Congress and other acti- 
vities, yet the Hindu cause ever remained a dear and 
cherished object in his lofty, religious heart. This 
very object impelled the revered Pandit to found 
various institutions which have done so much to 
awaken and strengthen the Hindu Society. Long 
ago he started the Hindu Samaj at Allahabad. Since 
then he has been the originator and the life and soul in 
connection with the introduction of Hindi characters in 
the U. P. courts, in establishing Hindu Boarding House 
at Allahabad, Seva Samiti Boy Scouts^ Association, 
Hindu University and finally the Hindu Mahasabha. . 

When Muslim aggression reached it^ climitx and 
Hindu interests were at stake, Panditji felt the need 



B42 


of an organisation to advocate the Hindu cause. Con- 
sequently we find him making unceasing efforts as one 
of the founders of the Hindu Mahasabha. The Hindu 
Community has rightly valued these efforts by electing 
him President at various Sessions of the Mahasabha. 
He presided over 1922, 1924 and 1926 special Sessions 
held at Graya, Belgaum and Gauhati respectively, and 
again in 1923 at the sixtli Session held at Benares. 
In 1928 at Jubbulpore Session there were some diffe- 
rences and Panditji left Mahasabha but did not with- 
drew his active support and co-operation whenever 
needed. In 1935 he was again elected President of 
the 17th Session held at Poona. In fact there are very 
few deliberations of the Mahasabha in which Malaviya 
ji does not figure prominently. This has led to the 
belief, even in the non-Hindus, that he and he alone 
can speak authoritatively from the Hindu side. That is 
why Mr. Jinnah and other Muslim Leaguers insisted 
on getting Malaviyaji’s word on Hindu-Muslim bar- 
gains made by Mr. Gandhi and the Congress 

In 1934, Malaviyaji differed with the Congress on 
the question of Communal Award and founded ‘the 
Congress Nationalist Party’, which did valuable work 
to keep the solidarity of the Hindu Society intact. 

Although Panditji is a staunch Sanatanist yet he 
is strongly in favour of Shuddhi and Achhut-udhar. 
He himself has given MANTRAS to Achhuts on the 



B43 


sacred banks of the Ganges at Benares and Allahabad. 
Some times this zeal for eradicating these social evils 
has led to very serious consequences. Some fanatic 
ruffians, on whom argument will not prevail, pelted 
stones on Panditji when Mantra ceremony was going 
on. Such incidents doubled his zeal and the opposition 
subsided in the long run. Panditji is also the President 
of the All India Shraddhanand Memorial Trust, found- 
ed for the purpose of removing untouchability. 

On several occasions Malaviyaji had to resort to 
Satyagrah for the Hindu cause. Once in the Kumbha 
fair at Allahabad authorities would not allow pilgrims 
to take bath at the Sangam. Pandit Malaviya was the 
first to defy this unjust order. Similarly when 
Katha was stopped at Har-Ki-Pairi, Hardwar, there too 
Panditji rushed and did Satyagraha by reciting Katha. 

Panditji is full of pity and love. These virtues 
sometimes become sources of trouble. Any body 
approaching him for help and co-operation finds his 
door open. Sometimes people try to have unfair ad- 
vantage of Panditji. Even in such cases he tries to 
do his utmost. 

In fact the Hindu Community will ever remain in- 
debted to Malaviyaji. His one achievement in the noble 
cause of Hindu education, the Hindu University alone, 
will remain a Centre of Hindu culture and a source of 
knowledge and light to the Hindus for ever. 



SHRl SHANICARACHARYA (Dr. Kurtkoti). 


Presided in 1924 & 1936. 


His Holiness Sliri Vidya Shanker Bliarati Swami, 
formerly Dr. Lingesh Mahabhagavat of Kurtkoti, 
Ph., D., etc., was born on the 20th May, 1879 A.D. in the 
well-known family, of Watandar Patil-Kulkarnis of 
Kurtkoti, District Dharwar. He is a great Sanskrit 
scholar of foreign reputation. He has written several 
works both in Sanskrit and English, and his “Heart 
of the Bhagavadgita” was accepted by the Oriental 
University of Washington, United States (America), 
as a thesis for the degree of Ph. D. He was for several 
years an Examiner for the additional Vedanta Prize 
Paper for M. A. of the Bombay University. The 
Government of Bombay had elected him a Member of 
the Moral Education Consultative Committee. He 
took a leading part in the foundation of the Indian In- 
stitute of Philosophy of Amalner (Khandesh), where 
he was a lecturer on the Philosophy of Shankaracharya, 
of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute at 
Poona, and of the Sanskrit Academy of Banglore 
(Mysore State) under the auspices of which he edited a 
well-known Anglo-Sanskrit quarterly, named ^ Sanskrit 



345 


Research.’^ Tlie Madras and the Southern Maratha 
Railway Company had given liim a free Second Class 
Pass to travel between Baiiglore and Poona as a 
Religious Preacher. 

He was in close connection with all Sanskrit Scholars 
and Philosophers in England, America, Fiance, Italy 
and Germany. Though he had not had foreign travels, 
he has imbibed both Eastern and Western culture. 
The installation. of such a scholar and public worker 
on the Jagadguru Peeth of Kolhapur on the Brd June 
1917 was unique. Many gentlemen from almost all 
parts of India were present on the occasion, and 
Europeans and Japanese too were seen among them. 
A number of telegrams and letters of congratulations 
were received from the Viceroy, the Governors of 
Bombay and Madras, the Maharajas of Mysore, and 
B«roda and several eminent gentlemen like the late 
Sir R. G. Bhandarkar, the late Sir Ashutosh Mookerji, 
Sir M. Vishesharayya and Sir C. Sankaran Nair. 

The expectations of the people about him and the 
promises given by him were amply realized after 
the installation of Shri Vidya Shankar Bharati Swami. 
He has ever since been the resplendent source and life 
of manifold activities whose aim is, one way or the 
Other, the emaBcipation of India from religious, 
social and educational thraldom. He has stimulated 
philosophical activities by taking a large part in the 



346 


establishment of philosophical societies at several 
places. He has been a pioneer of Sanskrit studies as 
evidenced by his efforts of founding the Sanskrit 
Vidyapeeth at Nasik, that is not yet i*6alised. He has 
headed institutions for National Education such as the 
Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapeeth of Poona. But his 
work as a socio-religious worker is even greater. It 
was he who started in the Maharashtra the practice of 
holding annual religious Confeience known as the 
Maharashtra Hindu Dharma Parishad, which has taken 
up seriously the questian of consolidation of the Hindu 
society and removal of hindrances and difficulties that 
threaten its existence. The keenness and versatility 
with which he has been studying these problems may 
be seen frcm the fact that as early as 1918, to 
attract the attention of the Government, of the public 
and of the political leaders, to the great religious 
problems of Hinduism, he interviewed his Excellency 
the Viceroy and the Right Honourable the Secretary of 
State for India, presided over the All-India Hindu Con- 
ference held at Allahabad and addressed a special meet- 
ing of the Home Rule League, Allahabad, as Chairman. 
That he values religious and social regeneration above 
all other things may be seen from the fact that 
without siding with one party or the other he has been 
trying to utilise the services of all for the advance of 
the Hindu Society. 



347 


Shri Sliaiikaracharya, Dr. Krutkoti, presided over 
the 8tli Session of the All India Hindu Mahasabha 
in 1924 at Prayag and over its 18th Session held in 
Lahore in 1936. 

The Jagadguru has a versatile intellect. He is con- 
versant with literature, rhetoric, grammar, philosophy, 
astronomy, medicine, and physical science. He has 
studied the Shastras with a veteran “Karmi” and by 
dint of his supeiior intelligence and dogged persever- 
ance he has acquired a vast proficiency in Sanskiit lite- 
rature. He has travelled a good deal and his extensive 
travels have greatly enlarged his views, not of external 
nature only, but of human life and manner. He has an 
exquisite natural taste for the sublime and the beautiful 
in Nature and Art. 

The Shankaracharya is not a narrow-minded bigot, 
but is thoroughly imbued with the spirit of universal 
toleration. He is full to the brim of the milk of 
human kindness, and so unbounded is his tenderness 
of heart that it takes in even the brute creation. His 
sparkling joviality and excellent bon homie shine out 
in almost every place. 



SHRI LALA LAJPAT RAI 


Presided in 1925. 


Lala Lajpat Rai was born in 1805 of humble but 
l^espectable parents in the small town of Jagraon in the 
district of Ludhiana. He came of an old Agarwala 
family. Lajpat Rai never wearied of acknowledging 
his indebtedness to his mother, a noble soul, and an 
ideal of Hindirwomanhood. His father, Munslii Radhe 
Kidshna Lai was a teacher of Persian and Urdu in the 
Qovt. High School at Rohaik. 

Lajpat Rai had a brilliant career as a student. He 
studied in the Government College at Lahore for two 
rears being in receipt of a University Schol*arship. 
Having passed the first Certificate Examination of 
Law of the Punjab University, he started practice in 
1883 when he was hardly 18 years of age. Two years 
later he passed the final Examination, standing second 
among thirty candidates. 

' About this time there happened an event which 
was the turning point of his career. He became 
associa-ted with two men^ — differently gifted and 
differently circumstanced — the late Guru Dutt 
Vidyarthi and the late Mahatma Hansraj. Since the 



349 


advent of Swami Dayanand Saraswati, the Land of the 
five rivers was seetliiug with social and religious 
fervour. Now the three men identified themselves 
with the new movement so completely! that there was 
scarcely a progressive propaganda which had not the 
benefit of their counsel and had not been inspired bj^ 
their vivifying genius. And they in turn found ample 
scope for the exercise of their patriotism, philanthropy 
and religious zeaL Guru Dutt, Hansraj and Lajpat 
Rai were thus constituted Apostles of the new 
evangel. 

AS A LAWYER AT ITISSAR AND 
LAHORE 

Having qualified himself as a pleader, Lala Lajpat 
Rai elected to settle down to practise at Hissar- in 
the Punjab, where he practised up to 1892 and 
became the leader of the local bar there. He also 
acted for three years as the Honorary Secretary of the 
Hissar Municipal Board. Although he was practising 
as a lawyer, still the greater portion of his time was 
nobly and unselfishly spent in discussing questions 
concerning the welfare not only of the province but of 
India as a whole. In 1892 he transferred liis practice to 
the wider field of Lahore, the nerve centre of North. 

Fortune smiled on his advocacy. Ha earned name^ 
fame and wealth and he took upon himself to utilise 



350 


all the three for his life long mission of Ary a Samaj 
and for the country at large. 

IN TI^E FIELD OF EDUCATION 

In education, secular and religious, Lala La jpat Rai 
took a very active interest. He took part in the 
foundation of the Dayanand Anglo-Vedic College at 
Lahore, on the 1st June 1886, with an endowment of 
some five lacs which he also was instrumental in 
collecting. 

It AVMS chiefly liis interest in education that took 
him to America in 1905, where he visited many edu- 
cational institutions and took careful notes for future 
guidance. He gave important evidence before Lord 
Curzon’s University Commission in 1902. 

After his return from the political mission on 
which he had gone to England as a colleague of the 
late Mr. Gokhale, he organised a political society and 
collected funds for educating the patriotic sons of the 
Punjab in politics and economics with a view to send 
them out as political missionaries on the model, we 
believe, of the ‘Servants of India Society’ of Poona. 
It was the Tilak School of politics, but now, it is gene- 
rally known as ‘the Servants of the People Sccxety’. 
It is now difficult to state if the members of the 
Society are carrying on the wishes of the late Lalaji in 
political sphere of the country. 



361 


In 1887, and agnin in 1891' — 1900, he organised the 
Hindu Orphans Relief movement which secured over 
2,000 orphans. He acted on both occasions as its 
Greneral Secretary. In April 1905, on the occasion 
of the great earthquake in the Ksngra District, he 
organised a Relief Committee on behalf of the Lahore 
Arya Samaj and as Secretary of ihat Committee 
he visited areas particularly afflicted, collected funds 
and hims^^lf supervised tlic administration of relief. 

Lala Lajpat Rai was also a man of exteiisive 
business connections. He was a Director of the Pun- 
jab National Bank, the first and the largest Indian 
Bank of its kind in the Punjab. He was interested in 
several cotton mills and cotton presses in the Punjab, 
being in several cases on the Board of Directors. 

Lala Lajpat Rai claims attention as a man of 
letters too. As a journalist, he for several years 
edited a vernacular magazine and a vernacular 
weekly journal, both conducted in the interests of 
religious and social reform and educational progress. 
He published Urdu biographical monographs on 
Mazzini. Garibaldi, Shivaji, Swami Dayanand and Sri 
Krishna — books which have been widely read and 
greatly appreciated in the province. He remained in 
constant touch with several newspapers conducted in 
English, contributing to them frequently on the 
leading questions of the day. He wrote in English the 



352 


life of Pandit Gurudatta Vidyarthi, M. A., the Indian 
J^eformer. He compiled a concise historical account 
of the Hindu civilisation up to the advent of the 
Musalman period. His account of the Ary a Samaj is 
an authoritative history of the institution. 

It was in lb88 that Lala Lajpat Rai joined the 
Indian National Congress movement when it met at 
Allahabad under the presidency of Mr. George Yule. 

At that time he believed, as many others did, that 
the Congress movement was the panacea of all our 
political ills but whenever he found that it was going to 
be anti-Hindu and anti-national he had the courage to 
break away with it. In his heart of heart, he ever re- 
mained, like all true patriots, a staunch Hindu. 

One of the greatest episodes in his political career 
was his deportation. The local Governmient had 
misunderstood him and his purpose. An agrarian 
uprising in the Province was mistaken for a deliberate 
conspiracy of the leaders. 

The Colonisation Bill, the Land Alienation Act 
Amendment Bill, the increase of canal rates, the pla- 
gue and all its attendant horrors brought in their 
train the natural chain of consequences. What could 
tha leaders do ? “Remove the discontent,” said the 
liiila, “that is at the bottom of it and soothe the 
angered, outraged feelings of the people.” This kind 
of talk was considered by a high authority “intolerable 



353 


rodomontade.” The old, unknown Act III of 1818 
was brought back from the forgotten archives of a 
century ago, the good Lala was dramatically 
spirited away from his familiar surroundings, and was 
deported to Burma. 

Owing to the generosity of Lord Minto Lalaji was 
released after about 2 ^mars. On his release the Lala 
himself openly challenged the accuracy of the dark 
charges levelled against him. 

In 1920 he presided over the Special Session of 
the Indian National Congress at Calcutta which was 
convened to settle the question of Non-co-operation. 
The decisions of that Session revolutionised the entire 
politics of the country but Lalaji, being a practical 
politician, deplored the results of the decision and he 
was not entirely hap])y. He was always fair to friends 
and foes alike and was extremely sad to see the 
Hindus neglected, nay crushed, by the false philosophy 
of the Congress under the pretext of Hindu-Muslim 
Unity, His letter to the late Mr. C. E.. Das ex- 
pressly displayed his ^iews on the impossibility of the 
Hindu-Muslim Unity. His penetrating eye could 
discern the baneful effect of it and he boldly sided the 
Hindu Mahasabha Movement. In 1925, he presided 
over the Calcutta Session of the Hindu Mahasabha. 
His Presidential Address speaks of his deep love and 
great attachment that he had for the Hindus and 



364 


Hindutva. In his presidential address Lalaji very ably 
propounded the principles of Hindu Sangathan move- 
ment. Lalaji finished his memorable address with the 
words, “I appeal to all the different Schools of Hindu 
Community to lay aside their differences and unite 
under the flag of the Hindu Mahasabha.” 

Even under any strong opposition Lalaji never 
gave way. In 1926 he fought for the Assembly seat 
against the Congress and inspite of all Congress 
influence against him he defeated two Congress candi- 
dates at two places. It was a remarkable proof of the 
anti-Oongress feeling in the Punjab and of the truth of 
his convictions. 

His was a life of self-sacrifice. He lived for the 
country and died for it. Truly a model Indian Patriot, 



SHRI KMX NARENDRA NATH 


Presided in 1926, 


Raja Narendranafch is one of the most respected 
persons in the Punjab. No other public man in the 
Punjab except a very few only, live for the Hindu 
cause. In these* days it is always considered that 
the man who can solve the unemployment prob- 
lem of our young men should be acclaimed as the 
only saviour. Well may Raja Narendranath be 
taken as one of the greatest saviours of the Punjab, 
He has, through his personal influence in Govern- 
ment circles as well as in other public institutions, 
been instrumental in giving employment to a large 
number of Hindu young men in his life. It is for the 
young men to remain always indebted to this great 
soul. He is an embodiment of kindness. 

Raja Narendranath belongs to a family which has 
left unforgettable marks on the annals of the Punjab 
history. Even in Cunningham’s History of the Sikhs, 
where complete list of the Sikh army is given, 
we find with bold letters a reference to ‘Diwan 
Ayodhya Prasad’s forces’, superior in number and 
strength to any brigade commanded by any Sikh 



356 


general. When the Sikhs were defeated in the First 
War, this army was disbantlecl, and all the Sikh Sar- 
dars lost their Jagirs. Diwan Ayodhya Prasad was 
reduced to the position of one from whom his cudgel 
has been taken away. He was with Maharaja Dalip 
Singh till he was sent to England. It was only 
Diwan x\yodh 5 "a l^rasad who boldly protested before 
Lord Dalhousie, out of all the ministers of Malnaraja 
Dalip Singh, against the forcible taking away of their 
young Maharaja to England, llaja Narendranath is 
the grandson of this great Diwan who was in charge of 
‘Fonje Khas’ which was once commanded by General 
Ventura. 

Raja Narendran^illi's great great grandfather, 
Pandit Krislian Das migi'ated from Kashmere in 1752. 
He got some employment under Delhi Emperors 
which he held npto his death. His son, Gangaram, 
entered the services of Maharaja of Gwalior. In 1803 
he gave up Jiis services under the Maharaja of Gwalior 
fUid lived in Delhi for 10 years. In 1813 Maharaja 
Ranjit Singh invited him and male him a Diwan. 
He was placed at the head of the Military office and 
made Keeper of the Seal. Diwan Gangaram died in 
1S86. His son Diwan Ayodhya Prasad was appointed 
in Military post in 1818, whose brief description has 
been given above. Diwan Ayodhya Prasad died in 
1870. His SOD Diwan Baij Kath had been a 



stipendary Extra Asv«?ist*^nt Commissioner in 1873# 
Diwan Baijnath died in 1875 and his estate was 
managed by the Court of Wards, when his son, Raja 
Nareudranath was of very young age. 

Diwan Narendra Nath passed his M. A. in 1886 
from the Govt* College, Lahore which he had joined in 
]881. He was appointed as an Assistant Commissioner 
ill 1888. He served as an Assistant Commissioner, Dis- 
tiict Judge, and Deputy Commissioner in different 
districts in the Punjab. He was appointed as an Offici- 
ating Commissioner of Lahore in DlV). 

From the very beginning, he has interested him- 
self in social rpiforrns. He was president of a social 
conference in 1893, when the Congress was presided 
over by Dadabhai Nowroji. Raja Saliib has taken ver}^ 
great interest in education— industrial and academic# 
He has been on the Board of Trustees as Chairman of 
the Dayal Singh College, Lahore and Victoria Diamond 
Jubilee Hindu Technical Institute, Lahore since their 
very start. 

He joined the Hindu Sabha Movement in 1917 
and from that time he has been representing the 
grievances of the Hindus before the Government wuth 
great boldness and courage. 

He was elected the President of the memorable 
Delhi Session of the Hindu Mahasabha in 1926. He 
presided over a Provincial Hindu Oonferonce at Multan 



358 


and in 1934 he presided over the Frontier Hindu 
Conference at Peshawar. In 1923 he presided over the 
Provincial Hindu Conference at Amritsar* For years 
together, after 1926, he remained as one of the vice- 
presidents of the Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha. 

Raja Sahib gave great help to Dr* B. S. Moonje 
during the days of the Round Table Conference. In 
1929, he went to England to plead the Hindu cause 
before the British statesmen. He was also invited to 
the Round Table Conference in 1931, But when the 
British Government gave the so-called Communal 
Award, Raja Sahib refused to participate in the third 
Round Table Conference and publicly sent his refusal 
not to participate in its deliberations in London. 

From the very commencement of the Provincial 
Council in the Punjab, Raja Sahib has been its most 
important member and has always been elected unop- 
posed From 1921 to 1926 he was the leader of the 
Opposition in the Punjab Council. In 1927, he wrote 
to the Government that in future Hindu Ministers 
should be appointed after consultation with him and 
that he should not be considered as a candidate for 
ministership. In the last election to the Punjab 
Legislative Assembly he was elected unopposed as 
usual. Perhaps very few people were elected unop- 
posed this time. In the Assembly he used to be 
described as ‘^the Father of the Punjab Assembly.” 



359 


On the first day of the meeting of the present 
Punjab Assembly, it was Raja Narendranath, who 
was requested by the Government of the Punjab to 
preside over the deliberations before the Speaker was 
elected. He has been the leader of the Hindu Sabha 
party which was styled as the National Progressive 
Party in the Punjab Legislative Assembly. The main 
object of Raja Sahib’s party has been to safeguard and 
fight for the interest of Hindus in the Punjab and 
for this reason co-operation or non-co-operation with 
the Government has always been of secondary impor- 
tance to him. When Sir Sikandar Hyat Khan sought 
his co-operation in early days of the formation of his 
Government, which were of course uneasy days for 
him, Raja Narendranath gladly extended his hand of 
co-operation to him only on one condition that Sir 
Sikandar’s Government will deal fairly with the 
Hindu and Sikh minorities in the Punjab. For this act 
of co-operation with Sir Sikandar, Raja Narendranath 
shared unpopularity and faced hostile demonstrations 
against him. But nothing moved him a step and he 
stood firm with Sir Sikandar, even at the cost of 
incurring displeasure of his own friends and Hindu 
Sabha people. But all knew that Raja Sahib, being a 
man of strong convictions, was supporting Sir Sikandar 
as in his heart of hearts he believed that the interest 
of the Hindu minority of his province lay in co- 



360 


opf^ralion with Government. A few months before the 
agitati<^n against Raja Sahib for extending his co-opera- 
tion w'ith Sir Sikandar, Raja Sahib wrote to the British 
Government that he would not accept any further titles. 

Few months back Sir Sikandar’s Government 
passed the Black Bills, which created caste differences 
in the Punjab and would be detrimental to the best 
interests of the Hindus and the Sikhs in the Punjab. 
Inside the Assembly Raja Sahib, a man of seventy four, 
even at the cost of his health, gave right royal battle 
to the Bills from the very start. He walked out of tbe 
Select Committee as his first mark of protest and defi- 
nitely told Sir Sikaiidar that to enact these Bills in their 
present form it would be nothing short of tyranny 
upon the minorities of the Province. As the Premier 
would not listen to the timely counsel of Raja Sahib, 
he abstained from attendiiig the Assembly any further 
His heart was almost broken as he could not bear the 
sight of injustice being done to the Hindus and Sikhs. 
Only a few people yet know that the Raja Sahib has 
already spent a great deal from his own pocket to 
carry on the agitation against the Bills and still fewer 
know that the personal interests of Raja Sahib are 
not aflfected by these Bills. But this self-less and 
trusted worker in the cause of justice and f airplay 
has not cared at all for his self-interests find gain and 
is whole-heartedly advocating the cause of the weak 



361 


and the helpless minorities of the Punjab. Raja 
Sahib had hoped against hopes that best counsels 
would prerail at the end. He memorialised the 
Governor not to give his assent to the Black Bills but 
all his hopes have been shattered. The Governor's 
assent to two of the Bills has proved the proverbial 
last straw and the Raja Sahib has kicked away his 
seat in the Assembly, where the Hindus must not 
expect any justice at all. 

He is, in fact, a political Sanyasi of whom the 
Hindus of the Punjab have much heed to-day. 



SHRI DR. B. S. MOONJE 


Presided in 1927. 


The veteran Doctor of 72 was born in Bilaspiir, (C.P.) 
His father, employed in a Government Department, 
was a staunch Hindu. Mindful of his son’s future 
he always exhorted him not to lose his ancient faith 
while he received English Education which, he was 
afraid, had denationalised many brilliant youths of the 
day. The advice given to him had a lasting impres- 
sion upon him and from his very boyhood Dr. Moonje 
has been of religious bent of mind and proud of an- 
cient Aryan g:lory. 

In 1898 he finished his Medical Education in the 
grand Medical College and for about two years he 
served the Bombay Corporation which he left to take 
an active service in the Boer War. There he served 
as an ‘in-charge’ Medical Ojfficer and for his meritorious 
services he was awarded a medal ‘clasp’. 

After the Boer War, as his active habit would 
have it, he wanted to settle down in Afghanistan but 
his dreams remained unrealised. He had to return to 
Nagpur and established himself as a very successful and 



363 


expert eye-operator. He adopted his own technics of 
cataract operation and in no time his fame as an eye- 
surgeon spread far and wide. 

But the restless soul of the Doctor was hankering 
after some new ^fields of glory.’ Day by day he grew 
impatient and at last threw himself heart and soul 
in the politics of the country. He joined the Indian 
National Congress, worked in various capacities and as 
a zealous Lieutenant of Lokmanya Tilak took very 
prominent part in the party-feuds between the Extrem- 
ists and Moderates. For a time he kept himself 
aloof from the Congress until in 1915 Lokmanya Tilak 
returned from jail. 

In 191(> when the Congress was held at Lucknow 
and the Hindu Muslim Pact- was formulated, Dr. Moonje 
was empliaticalljr against the introduction of separate 
electorates but he yielded due to the advice of elder 
politicians. But he always held belief since that time, 
that the obligation was made as a political sagacity 
which did not justify itself by the results expected 
from it in the shape of Hindu Muslim Unity. 

After the death of the late Lokmanya Tilak, Mr. 
Gandhi came to the fore in the Congress, but from 
the very beginning, the Philosophy and work of Mr. 
Gandhi did not appeal to him. He could not agree 
with the principle of Mr. Gandhi that he could 
conquer everybody with love. Dr. Moonje himself is a 



364 


responsive co-operationist and does not believe in the 
doctrines of non-violenee and Satyagralia. He is strong- 
ly in favour of developing militarism among Hindus. 
He believes that as the Hindus form the majority in the 
country they have got full right of attaining Swaraj 
and of developing socialism in which all communities 
could be treated quite impartially. With this policy he 
could not see eye to eye with the Congress gods but 
he ne\^er cared to court their favour. In 1922 Dr. 
Moonje had to go to Madras to enquire into the 
causes of the Mopa riots. He was shocked to know 
the atrocities and outrages committed npon the inno- 
cent Hindus — men, women and childern by the Muslim 
Moplas. His whole mentality underwent a change. 
He became out and out a staunch believer in the Hindu 
Mahasabha programme. Malabar affairs impressed him 
deeply and brought him home the truth that the 
Hindu Muslim TTi>ity was an impossibility on the lines 
followed by the Congress. 

This was a revolt against Gandhi’s policy of 
Pacifism. 

In 1926 the Doctor was elected to the Central 
Legislatiire but after four years he resigned in response 
to the call of the country. 

Soon he was looked upon in the Assethbljr as & 
member well versed in Military matters and as one who 
could speak on the subject authoritatively. It was he 



365 


who gave the push of momentum to the thought of 
Indianisation of the Army in India. In 1927 he waa 
elected as the President of the 10th Session of the 
All India Hindu Mahasabha, held at Patna. His address 
is remarkable for clear thoughts and^ convictions. 
Since then he has been taking a very keen interest 
in the Hindu Mahasabha Movement and can safely be 
regarded as one of those very few Hindu leaders who 
have been steadfastly and dauntlessly advocating the 
cause of the Hindhs-.through thick and thin. In 1930 
he took part in the Round Table Conference and though 
the entire community was opposed to him, Dr. Moonje 
boldly stood all the opposition in the conviction that 
his joining the Round Table Conference was inevitably 
essential in face of Mr. Jinnah and other Musalmans 
having accepted the invitation to join it. The 
Hindus have blessed him for the most valuable services 
rendered to them in the Round Table Conference and 
feel grateful to him. 

No doubt Dr. Moonje stands as a unique personality 
in our country’s politics and reform movement but he 
is chiefly known now-a-days as a great pioneer in the 
field of practical Military Education in India. The 
name of Bhonsala Military School has reached even 
the remotest corner of India and Hindus are truly 
proud of it. Many before Dr. Moonje could think of 
the dire necessity of imparting Military training to our 



366 


young men but it was the Doctor’s task to give a 
practical shape to the long-cherished dream. The 
Bhonsala Military School shall ever remain a standing 
monument to great Doctor’s courage of conviction, his 
love of ancient Rashtraya glory and his shrewd sense 
of practical statesmanship. To quote his words, “We 
start with the conviction that our fighting men, speak- 
ing impartially and without passion or bias, do not lack 
in the ardour for fight or courage or dash or leadership 
but it is equally a fact that without the training in the 
^European methods of warfare their fighting virtues do 
not yield the results that they ought to. 

“This military School is intended to be an attempt 
at removing these defects so that our boys may vie 

with British boys on battle fields In short the 

School will attempt to infuse British virtues of mili- 
tarism in our boys without anglicising them or dena- 
tionalising them. In fact the School will strengthen 
their Hinduism in its prestine purity.” Such is the 
hope and ambition of Dr. Moonje. 



SHRi N. C. KElKAR 


Presided in 1928 & 1982» 


Shriyut N. C. Kelkar was born at Miraj, on 24th 
of August, 1872. As a child, he was very precocious. 
He was educate4 at Miraj, Kolhapur and Pooua. His 
academic career was brilliant and he took his LL. B. 
Degree in 1894. 

Just as a duckling takes to water, so did Mr. Kelkar 
took to journalism. He wrote a charming prose, racy 
and homely. Tlis writing throbbed with a moral 
purpose. It sparkled with cultured humour. It did 
not reek midnight oil but had the freshness ot the 
dew on it. Lokamanya Tilak who was emphatically 
a writing man, was not slow in recognising Shri 
Kelkar’s journalistic flair. In 1896, Tilak took his 
assistance in conducting law classes and to edit the 
‘Mahratta’. 

In 1897, Lokamanya was prosecuted and his mantle 
devolved itself on the worthy shoulders of Mr. Kelkar. 
He was appointed as the Editor of both the ‘Kesari’ 
and the ‘Mahratta’. The journals became a faithful 
reflection of his personality. As Editor, mystical 



368 


vrorship of efficiency was liis master-passion. He 
always kept the journals on the high table-land of 
justice and fair-play. Trenchant and pointed, the edi- 
torials were highly illuminating and logically water- 
tight. Sir G. Subramanya Iyer, the President of the 
1898 Congress Session, paid a warm tribute to the 
genius of Shriyut Kelkar as a remarkable Editor. 

After the release of Lokamanya Tilak, Shriyut 
Kelkar was confirmed as the Editor of the ‘Mahratta’. 
The second conviction of the Lokamanya again made 
him the Editor of both the journals. 

In 1920 Shriyut Kelkar succeeded the Lokamanya 
as the Director of the ‘Kesari’ aud the ‘Mahratta’. He 
has maintained intact the stormy independence of 
those fearless journals. 

Shriyut Kelkar is not an intellectual millionaire, 
but has an inexhaustible pocketful of coppers. The 
mere volume of his output is amazing He has 
published forty volumes within forty years. Shriyut 
Kelkar is with justice called ‘SahityaSamrat.’ 

His enthusiasm for things of the intelleot is un- 
fh^ging. His works in Marathi are springs of perfect 
sweetness. The Kelkarian age has witnessed a fresh 
w^lig^up of life, of new experiences and of new 
farms of art. 

The paHtieian ahd the jpmm&list Otire the two. facets 



369 


of Shriyut Kelkar's genius. His political career has 
been marked by unyielding purpose and resourceful 
generalship. He will unhorse the opponent with a 
phrase. He will descend on him like an avalanche. 
He is the type of a general who will not lose a gun 
but snatches victory. 

In 1917, Shriyut Kelkar was the Secretary of the 
Tilak Home Rule League. In 1919, he went to Eng- 
land as the organiser of the Congress Deputation and 
the Secretary of the Home Rule League Deputation. 
In 1923, he joined Das and Nehru in forming the All- 
India Swaraj Party and was elected to the Supreme 
Legislative Council. There he became the chief whip 
of the Swaraj Party. 

In 1925, there was a rift between Kelkar and Das 
on the question of Office acceptance. Thereafter 
he and Jayakar formed the Responsivist Party. 

Since 1930, he did not contest election. 

% 

Shriyut Kelkar was the first President of the 
Democratic Swaraj Party and was also the President 
of the Maharashtra Provincial Congress Committee. 
For two terms, he was the President of the Poona 
City Municipality* He attended the III R. T. C. as 
a delegate and twice refused the invitation. 

“Writing he has understood and politics misunder- 
stood”, say the phantom accusers of Shriyut Kelkar. 



370 


In politics, Shriyut Kelkar is topically anticipatory. 
He is a prophet with a bright vision. For the last 
seventeen years, he has been passionately pleading 
for the Council-entry programme. Then his voice 
was a cry in the wilderness. Now it has become the 
official programme of the Congress. The mistake of 
Syt, Kelkar was that he is an astute statesman with 
deep insight and great fore-thought. 

Shriyut Kelkar has a social talent. He is bright 
at repartee. His ready wit sets the table on roar. 
He is the sort of man whom one would like to have 
as a companion on a desert island. Once Das said 
that Mahrattas lost the empire on account of their 
internal dissensions. The remark touched Shriyut 
Kelkar to his quick. Immediately he retorted that 
the Mahrattas had at least an empire to lose. 

Shriyut Kelkar ^is a democrat. He believes in the 
magical virtue of the ballot. He has combined initia- 
tive and leadership with a belief in the common man 
and a readiness to enlist his co-operation. If demo- 
cratic leadership means a leadership of persuasion 
and friendly guidance and not a leadership of force 
and domination, then Shriyut Kelkar ha*p few rivals 
to explain and to inspire the democratic faith. 

His writings have found expression in his action. 
He is not a visionary but a practical genius. He has 



371 


got passion but it is controlled by an acute mind. He 
has zeal and it has warmed the fibres of his utterances- 
He is a veritable fount of schemes for associations to 
promote the public weal. There is no movement in 
Maharashtra of which the germ cannot be traced to 
his Writing. He is connected with the working of 
nearly 60 institutions. 

His political creed is suffused by a religious glow. 
3Por he is a doughty champion of the cause of the 
Hindus. He does not tolerate an inch of their rights 
to be deprived, nor does he aspire an inch of others’ 
rights to aggrandise. He asks for no quarters nor 
does he give any to the enemy. 

He has always been taking very keen interest in 
affairs of the All India Hindu Mahavsabha, He has 
presided over two Sessions of the All India Hindu 
Mahasabha, one at Jubbulpore in 1928 and the other 
at l>elhi in li)32. He also pi^sided over a Special 
Session of the Mahasabha at Cawnpore in 1925. 

In 1929 he was the President of the Frontier 
Punjab Provincial Hindu Conference held at Lahore. 

Shriyut. Kelkar was the Chairman of the 17 th Session 
of the All India Hindu Mahasabha held at Poona 
under the Presidentship of Pandit Madan Mohan 
Malaviyaji. It is owing to his lead and initiativeness 
that the Hindu Sabha Movement has become so 
popular in Maharashtia. 



SHRI BABU RAMANANDA CHATTERJI 


Presided in 1929. 


Babn Ramanand Chatterji was born on May 28, 
1865 in a Brahman family in a town of Western- 
most Bengal. Bis family was well-known for the 
priestly scholars. From his early childhood, he was 
distinguished to be as one of the most brilliant boys. 
Babu Ramanaiid had a very brilliant career at his 
back and was drawn to journalism from his very early 
life. Although from his college days he began his 
life of journalism yet his serious effort was his 
editing the ‘Dasi’. Afterwards he edited ‘The Indian 
Messenger’ and the ‘Pradip’ which he himself started. 
Afterwards he started ‘Prabasy’ from Allahabad in 
1901. In 1907, he started his well-known monthly 
magazine, ‘the Modern Review’ which has to-day 
become an institution by itself. Babu Ramanand 
Chatterji is counted as one of the greateit journalists 
in the world of journalism. Bengal in particular Will 
always remain grateful to Babu Ramanand for the 
service he has done to propagate the Bengal literature 
1 - modern times. 



B8^ba Ramanand Chatterji formerly belonged tO 
the Brahmo SamaJ. He is a great social crusaderi 
In the field of politics, Babu Ramanand Chatterji 
belongs to that claats of patriots who are considered 
the champions of full Indian Independence and he 
used to express his views with all boldness even in 
those days when there were very few to take up the 
cause of full independence* Since early in life, he has 
been taking keen -interest in the activities of the Indian 
National Congress. 

In 192G, Babu Ramanand Chatterji was invited by 
the League of Nations at Geneva to study its activi- 
ties. It was a great houour not only to Babu Rama- 
nandji but to India as well. He has presided over a 
large number of social and religious Conferences, viz. 
Sadharam Brahmosamaj, All India Theistic Conference 
and Jat-Pat-Torak Mandal. Lahore. In politics also, 
with the change of times and of circumstances, 
Babu Ramanand Chatterji took up the cause of 
Hindu Mahasabha. In 1929, he presided over the 12tli 
Session of the Hindu Mahasabha which was held at 
Surat and remained a Vice-president of the Hindu 
Mahasabha for a number of years. He also presided 
over the All India States’ Peoples’ Conference and the 
All India Anti-Commnnal-Award Conference So 
far as this so-called Communal-Award is concerned, 
Babu Ramanand Chatterji has rendered yeoman 



374 


to the cause of Hindusthan. He has been 
carrying on ceaseless agitation from the Press and the 
Platform against this abnoxious document which is 
Uaeant according to him ‘to divide the Country into 
water-tight Compartments and keep permanent sub^ 
jection of Hindusthan under the British thumb*’ In 
1986, he was invited to picside ovet* the Second All 
India Hindu Youths Conference which he readily 
accepted, but his ill-health did not permit him to 
preside over the Conference and the conveners had 
to postpone the Conference. His message to the 
Hindu Youths was so inspiring as to show that it did 
not come fi‘om an old man of 75 but rather from a 
youngman* Babu Bamaaand Chatterji is the advocate 
of true Nationalism and is always ready to fight for 
the just interests of the Hindus who form the major 
community of India* 



SHRI C. VIJIARAGHAVACHARIAR 


Presided in 1931. 


Shri C. Vijiaraghvachariar is generally known as the 
Grand Old Man of India. He was born in the month of 
Jane in 1852 in a village near Chingleput in South 
India, about forty miles from Madras, io an orthodox 
Brahman family. He spent his early youth in 
learning Sanskrit and Vedas, but a kindly uncle who 
knew English snatched him away from the village 
and sent him to a school to learn English. He 
was educated in Pachiappa’s High School and the 
Presidency College, Madras whence he graduated in 
1875. He was employed in the educational depart- 
ment for a short while. But he resigned the service 
and joined the Bar and began to practise at Salem. 
While practising as a pleader he took great active 
interest in public affairs and politics. He was elected 
Municipal Councillor. In 1895 he was elected a 
member of the Madras Legislative Council and he 
remained in it for six years. Afterwards he resigned 
amidst the appreciation of his countrymen. 

It wasdn 191B that he became a member of the 
Imperial Legislative Council, then consisting of one 



Chamber only. He t.ook a very active part in it, both 
by way of questions and resolutions as well as by his 
speeches on Legislative measures. The most impor- 
tant measure introduced during the period was the 
‘Conspiracy Bill’. Curiously enough he and the late 
Sir Surendranath Banerji were the only two members 
who opposed it vigorously. At that time Lord 
Hardinge of Penshurst was the Governor-General 
and Viceroy of India. He became one of the few 
prominent members and a cordial friendship arose 
between the Viceroy and himself which lasts even to 
this hour. 

He became a staunch ‘Congress wallah’ and he was 
elected its President in 1920 over its Session held at 
Nagpur. His speech at the Nagpur Session was very 
much appreciated, especially by the ‘Statesman’ of 
Calcutta. It is worthwliile to mention here that it 
was by his continued and persistent efforts that Bhai 
Parmanandji owed his final release from fearful con- 
viction to which he was subjected. 

The Right Hon’ble Sir Edwin S. Montague, Secre- 
tary of State for India, who with Lord Chelmsford, the 
Viceroy of India, examined him with reference to seve- 
ral public questions affecting India, says as follows : — 
He is an astute thinker, he objects very strongly 
to all forms of imprisonment without trial. I think 
ho M m tho right lines in these things. He .objects to 



377 


provincial autonomy and wants development of the 
government of India with a Parliament of 300 people. 
He is the most vigorous thinker that I have met, 
even though some of his ideas are impracticable”. 
He is the member of the Hindu Mahasabha and he 
presided over the 15th Session of the Akhil Bharatiya 
Hindu Mahasabha held at Akola in 1931. At the same 
time it is worthwhile to mention that although he is a 
Brhaman he is respected by all castes and creeds in 
India. Only half a dozen years ago an important 
Conference was held at Allahabad with a view to bring 
about a complete unity between Moslems and the rest 
of the people in India. It was called the Unity 
Conference, consisting of all parties in India. Mr. 
Achariar was its president, unanimously elected on 
the proposal of Moulaiia Shaukat Ali and seconded by 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya. 



SHRI BHAI PARMANANDA 


Presided in 1933. 


Bhai Parmananda has in his veins the blood of the 
great martyr Bhai Mati Das whose body was sawed 
into two by the order of the Moghul King Aurangzeb, 
Just before Guru Teg Bahadur offered his head to be 
laid before the sword at the Chandni Ohowk of Delhi. 

It was in the year 1675. About two hundred 
years after was born Bhai Parmananda in the same 
family. 

One thing which characterises his early life was his 
great attachment and deep devotion to Arya SamaJ. 

After taking his degree of Master of Arts in 
History from the University of the Punjab in 1901 
Bhaiji joined the D. A. V. College, Lahore, as its 
Life-Member and workad in the institution for several 
years as Professor of Histoiy and Political Economy. 
He was in a way the moving spirit of the first group 
of life members of that institution. During the time 
he worked in the College, he had to perform a double 
duty : one of teaching and the other of going about on 
lecturing tours for Arya Samaj. 



379 


In 1905 he went to the East and South Africa as a 
Hindu Missionaiy to preach the gospel of Vedic 
Dharma and Hindu culture. He founded Arya 
Samaj and Hindu Young men’s Association in South 
Africa where he stayed for about a year. During his 
tour he came in close contact with Mr. Gandhi. From 
Africa he went over to England. 

He studied in the King^s College, London for a 
year and half and worked in the British Museum on 
Indian Histor}^ an(f wrote his thesis on the “The First 
Attempt at Independence in 1883’’ which was not 
accepted by the Anglo-Indian examiners who were 
specially selected for the purpose. After this he 
returned to India early in 1908. 

On his return he got published his well-known 
book, “History of India”, which was written from pure- 
ly Hindu point of view, tracing the growth and decline 
of the Hindus as a nation and at the same time giving 
true facts about incidents like the so-called Black Hole 
and Indian Mutiny. This book was subsequently 
proscribed by the Punjab Government, 

He was arrested in a political case in 1909 in 
which he was bound over for thre’C years and had to 
say good-bye to the College and so went out of India 
for the second time and spent a year in visiting the 
British Colonies in South America. From there he went 
over to California, spent two years in the University 



380 


and got his degree in Psychology. By the end of 1913 
he came back to India. 

In the middle of 1914 broke out the Great War 
when a very large number of Sikhs and Hindus returned 
to India with the object of creating political unrest in 
the country. Sir Michael O'Dwyer, the Lt. Governor 
of the Punjab, had very strong suspicions about Bhai 
Parmananda. He is said to have remarked once: “He 
( Bhai Parmananda ) says he is manufacturing drugs, 
but God knows what he is manufacturing.” In the 
beginning of 1915 Bhaiji was arrested in connection 
with the Ghadar Conspiracy Case of Lahore and tri^d 
by a Special Commission under the Defence of India 
Act, specially passed by the Imperial Council for this 
purpose. After a protracted trial he, along with 
several others, was sentenced to death, wliich sentence 
was afterwards commuted by Lord Hardinge to trans- 
portation for life. He was kept in the Cellular jail for 
five years and underwent much suffering. He got 
tired of his prison life and was on hunger-strike for 
two months to end his days. On the news of release 
being given to him, he gave it up. He was reduced to 
a skeleton on his release in 1920. 

After cording back from the Andamans he work- 
ed for two years as the Director of the Servants of 
the People Society, Lahore while the late Lala Lajpat 
Bai was in jail. For five years he worked as 



381 


the Chancellor of the National University and the 
National College, founded by the Punjab Congress 
Committee. It would not be out of place to point out 
that he performed all these duties without receiving 
any remuneration. Therefore he was the most res- 
pected person in the Punjab Congress circles. He had 
taken this work upon himself simply for the reasons 
that since his return from England in 1908 he had lost 
all faith in the system of education prevailing in India. 
He held a view in ^common with Lala Har Dayal tha.t 
this system was introduced into India simply with the 
object of denationalising Indians and creating a class 
of Indians who could serve as a link between the rulers 
and the ruled. 

In the field of journalism Bhai Parmaiianda enjoys 
a position of note. Besides the auto-biography, ‘My 
Story’, he has written several books on History and 
Politics, e.g., History of the Punjab, History of Maha- 
rashtra, History of Rajasthan and History of Europe; on 
Philosophy as Gita Amrit and the Birth of a New Na- 
tion and Biographies such as Bir Bairagi, Saint Sukrat, 
Balmik and others. He has also been editing his journal, 
“Hindu”. At present he has been regularly writing 
for his ‘Hindu’, Lahore, ‘Hindu Outlook’ and ‘Hindu 
Weekly’, New Delhi. It is these writings of his that 
have made, a deep impression on the public mind and 
have gone a long way in giving strength to the Hindu 



382 


Sabha Movement in India. These writings would prove 
a Jiving and permanent fruit of his labour of love. 

Daring the Hindu^Muslim riots of l©22-’23 he came 
to realise the wrong line of policy adopted by the 
Congress and joined hands with Lala Lajpat Rai and 
Pandit M. M. Malaviya in starting the Hindu Maha- 
sabha for the purpose of organising the Hindus. 
When, after a short time, Lalaji and Pandit Malaviya 
for all practical purposes, left Hindu Mahasabha and 
Went over to the Congress, he alone stood as the 
pioneer of the Hindu National Movement. 

A few years after when the present Constitution 
W’'as in the making, he saw that the Congressmen were 
really bent upon bringing about a Muslim Raj in the 
country and that tliej’’ would not object to any 
constitution simply on the ground of Muslixn weightage 
in it. Then he felt it necessary that he should go to 
the Assembly in order to safeguard the rights and 
interests of the Hindus, and that he should place, from 
time to time, the Hindu point of view also before the 
Government and the country. So in 1931 he was 
returned unopposed to the Central Legislative Assem- 
bly but in 1935 when he again sought election, he was 
opposed by the Congress. The Congress candidate 
was defeated by an overwhelming majority of about 
2000 vdtes from the constituency which is the biggest 
in the Punjab and which includes 3 divisions — Lahore, 



383 


Multan and Kawalpindi. This shows that the masses 
of the Punjab were also at his back. 

Bhai Parmaiiandji was elected President of the 
Ajmer Session of the All India Hindu Mahasabha in 
1935. The whole Hindu India felt honoured and 
immediately after assuming the Presidentship of 
the All India Hindu Mahasabha, Bhai Parmananda 
undertook an all India tour immediately after 
the Session. He visited important towns in all the 
provinces of India, i. e. Agra and Oudh, Bihar, Bengal, 
Bombay Presidency, Central Provinces, Gujrat, Madras 
Presidency, Maharashtra, the N. W. F. Province and 
the Punjab. In the Maharashtra Province Dr. B. S. 
Moonje and Sjt. R, G. Bhidey also joined him. In 
almost all the cities, mass meetings of the Hindus 
were he]^ and unanimous resolutions condemning the 
so-called Communal Award were passed, texts of 
which were communicated to the Government and to 
the Joint Parliamentary Committee. 

It was Bhaiji who took up to fight the Communal 
Award from the moment it was passed. 

He was also elected the Working President of the 
Hindu Mahasabha and remained at the helm of affairs 
consecutively for about four years. During this period 
he made the Hindu Maha Sabha a living organization. 
The days of keeping the Mahasabha as a subsidiary or 
a corollary organization to the Congress with a half 



384 


•way policy were no longer to be continued and hence 
it was re-organized as quite a separate body from the 
Congress with its own principles, aims and objects, 
policy and programme. 

Bhaiji has founded a Hindu Sewa Ashram for 
training persons who would devote their lives to the 
Hindu Sangathan Movement and for this object in 
view" he proposed to devote all that he has. For the 
maintenance of the Ashram he donated his 100 shares 
of the Sugar Mills which were then of the Market Value 
of Rs. 36000/- and of the Annual Income Rs. of 4000/-. 
He is at present running two journals from New Delhi — 
the ‘Hindu Outlook’ and the ‘Hindu’ (Hindi). 

For the building of the Ashram he has collected 
Rs. 20000/-. 

For the construction of the Hindu Maha Sabha 
Bhawan the main credit should surely go to Bhai 
Panuanandji for taking all the initiative for getting 
such a wonderful building constructed, which has even 
now become a place of daily pilgrimage for hundreds 
of Hindus without any distinction of caste or creed 
whatsoever. 

There is another phase worth mentioning; that is, 
Bhai Parmananda as a social reformer. Bhai Parma- 
nanda having been connected with Arya Samaj from his 
vOTy early life, always felt the need of not only radical 
soiial reform but social reconstruction of the Hinda 



385 


society. So far as he could see the Arya Samaj had 
paid but little attention to this very important ques- 
tion. Hence about 16 years ago he started a new 
movement within the fold of the Samaj and founded 
the Jat Pat Torak Mandal (Society for the Abolition 
of the caste system) 

Bhai Parmanandji has an extraordinary ability as 
a practical politician and as a great statesman. 
Being an admitted historian his statesmanship of high 
quality is amply evidenced to a student of history who 
has followed the political vicissitudes during the last 
decade. 

His is a life of sacrifice and suffering for the cause 
of his country and the Hindus, Very rarely does one 
meet with a life so full of variety and charm. But 
through all the phases of his life runs one common 
note, that is of unflinching devotion to the Hindu 


cause. 



SHRI BHIKSHU UTTAMA 


Presided in 1935. 

Bhikshu Uttaina comes of a very respectable 
Buddhist family of Burma. 

At the age of about 30 years Uttama became a 
Bhiksliu, left the homely comforts, high standard of 
living and his beloved relations, and joined the army 
of Lord Buddha. He began to spend days and nights, 
months and years in worshipping Lord Buddha and in 
the propagation of the ideals and principles laid down 
by the revered Lord. Soon he became one of the fore- 
most leaders of Buddhism. He went to Europe, China, 
Japan and other foreign countries for preacliing the 
gospel of Bhagwan Buddha. He is one of the great- 
est Buddhist missionaries. 

He leads a very -simple life and never thinks of 
any particular kind of meals. Generally he lives 
on fruits and milk. He finds pleasure in travelling 
in 3rd class. 

It is not only in the sphere of religion in which 
Bhikshu Lttama became popular but even in the politi- 
cal sphere in Burma his position was unsurpassed and 
perhaps will ever remain so. A very interesting 
inoident is told about the love and respect which the 
people of Burma have for their respectable leader. 



H87 


Oncf^ Bhikshu Uttama was involved in a case* He 
Used to go out to attend the Court* The ladies of Burma 
used to lay down on the road on both sides and used to 
spread their long liair to enable the Bhikshu to walk 
over them. 

BliiksLu Uttama is a very learned man who know^s 
Chinese, Japanese, English, Pali, Hindi, Bengali and 
many other languages* 

He IS deadl}^ opposed to the caste s^^stem prevalent 
in the Hindu society. He wmnts the Hindus to give 
up the caste system if they want to live like a living 
nation, Bhikshu Uttama also takes very keen interest 
in the upliftiuent of tlie depressed-classes. 

Years back Bhikshu Uttama’s position was very 
high in tlie circle of Indian National Congress. In 
Burma he was once a pillar of Congress Movement. 
He was even offered the Presidentship of the Cong- 
ress which on acicount of unavoidable circumstances 
he could not accept. 

In the last movement against the separation of 
Burma it was only Bhikshu Uttama’s personality that 
could lead the great movemein* He believed that 
Burma should not have been separated from India as 
both these countries are, as a matter of fact, one from 
religious and cultural point of view. The Government 
of Burma extenied him for a long time and he w^as 
not permitted to enter his dear country. 



388 


It was in these days of externment in Calcutta 
that he became interested in Hindu Sabha Movement. 
It was generally believed that Buddhism and Hindu- 
ism are two distinct religions; but Bluksliu Httania’s 
accepting Presidentship of the Session of tlie all India 
Hindu Maha Sabha held at Cawnpore in April 11)35 
was a befitting reply to that wrong notion. 

In his Presidential Address Bliikshu Uttaina declar- 
ed that Bhagwan Buddha was one of the staunchest 
Hindus and that he never renounced Hindu Hliarma. 
On the other hand he infused new blood in it and spread 
it in other distant countries. His election as Presi- 
dent of the Hindu Mahasabha was hailed not only in all 
quarters of India only but it was welcomed by Buddhist 
countries like China and Japan. A very large number 
of Buddhists even from China attended this Session 
of the Hindu Mahasabha. His Presidential Address, 
given bcdore, shows how able lie was to understand 
the political situation in India. As the President of 
the Hindu Mahasabha he toured the whole of the 
Punjab, the United Provinces, Bengal, Maharashtra 
and other provinces. He remained as a Vice-President 
of the Hindu Maha Sabha for a number of years. His 
one aim of life is to see the Hindus and Buddhists 
united together and thus to revive the Vishal Arya 
Dharma once again. 



SHRI VEER V. D. SAVARKAR 


Presided in 1987 & 1938. 


Vppr Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, son of Shriyut 
Damodarpai|t Savarkar, born in 1883 A. 1). at Bliao;oor^ 
Dist. Nasik, is tbo 2nd son of his wortliy father. 
In his veins runs tlie blood of Balaji Mshwariath, of 
Bajirao, ilie foremost general that Hindiistlian ever pro- 
duced, of Nana Bhadanwis, of martyrs like Chapliekar 
brothers, of lianade, and of ^reat Tilak — as all of them 
belonged to Chitpavans' section of the Maharashtriya 
Brahmins. No wonder then that destiny should 
liave chosen this particular caste to bring foi'tli and 
nestle the child which was to be to quote Velen- 
tine Chirol, ^one of the most brilliant of modern 
Indian revolutionists’. Vinayak e\ er since his 
childhood was given to lofty aspirations and was 
marked out by all those who came in contact with 
him as an exceptionally gifted child. 

He began to compose Marathi verses when but 
ten years old. Well-known papers in Poona began to 
accept his contributions, prose and poetical, hardly 
realising that tlie writer of them was but a boy of 
such tender years. 



390 


In 1897 there came news that Chaphekars and 
Ranade were executed in Yeravada. On the day of 
their execution they had got up early, praj^ed long 
and reciting loudly the verses of the Bliagvad Gita 
mounted the scaftbld. This extraordinary fortitude 
and tlie pathos of it all moved Vinajxak as nothing 
else in his life did. He read it all with weeping ejms. 
He thought; ‘Well tliere, the Chaphekars are gone. 
They died full of youth and hope. They sacrificed 
their life, their families, and all that they held dear 
in this world on the altar of Motherland and shall I live 
only to eat and drink and be merry ! Their work is un- 
finished, their most cherished desire luifulfilled. Why 
should not I take up the vow of trying my level best 
and sacrificing my dearest and nearest, life and all, to 
fulfil their mission ? I will do it or die in the attempt.’ 

The young boy repaired to the Sanctum- Sanctorum 
of his family where the image of Durga was daily 
worshipped. He sat at her feet and there and then 
he took a solemn vow of dedicating his life to the 
mission of liberating Hindusthan from the fetters of 
foreign rule. 

"With his fiery resolve he set the youths of Hindu- 
sthan aflame. He would organise a secret society, 
arm and equip his countrymen and fight out the 
grand struggle and if need be to die sword in hand in 
her cause. Of such mettle was Veer Savarkar. 



391 


In 1901, Viiiayak paseed his Entrance Examination. 
IJe was married with the dangliter of the then 
Minister of Jawhar. He joined the famous Eergusson 
College at Poona for higher studies. He was a 
prominent youtli, leader of the time. Swadeshi 
movement was rampant. Boycott of foreign clothes 
was rapidly gaining adherents. On August 22Dd, 1905 
Mr. Savarkar organised a bonfire of the foreign clothes. 
Tliat was the first of its kind in Hindusthan. The then 
Principal of the College, Dr. Paranjpe, now the Vice 
Chancellor of the LucknoAV Universitj^ rusticated him 
from the College residency. Lokmanya Tilak defend- 
ed him very stronglj^ in one of his famous leading 
articles in *Kesari’. Such was Ins oratorical powers 
both in Marathi and English, which he still retains, 
that Prof. Patwardhan used to say of him that 
he was bound to be a great demagogue. He 
graduated and was staying in Bombay. He edited 
‘Vihari’ for a year. While he was studying 
law, he established ‘Abhinava Bliarat’ organiza- 
tion, a historic band of his colleagues. Within 
the course of time the number increased to fifteen 
thousand. ‘ 

On the recommendation of Lokmanya Tilak the late 
Pt. Shamji Krishna Varma awarded Sliivaji Scholarship 
to Savarkar. He proceeded to England to become a 
barrister but the real object of his visit to that country 



392 


was to study the historical records on the so-called 
Sepoy Mutiny of 1857. 

Shamji Krishna Varma, Madame Cama, Mr. V. V. 
S. Iyer, Lala Hardayal and Bhai Parmananda were 
his collegues in England. They too had a part in his 
thrilling activities in the Bintish cosmopolitan. It was 
by chance that Lala Hardayal met Veer Savarkar 
in the steamer taking them to England. 

Veer Savarkar hired one of the houses of Shamji 
and named it as Tndia House’. This became a 
boarding and lodging house for many Indian students 
in London. Here Sjt. Savarkar wrote his book, 
‘The First War of Independence,’ a book on tlio last 
struggle of freedom by the Indians in 1857. 

The book was originally written in Marathi but 
no publisher dared come forward to publish it. It 
was then re-written in English but met with the same 
fate. One Grerman publisher promised to publish 
it but he too failed. It was in Holland that the book 
was published at last. Even his other books as the 
Life of Mazzini, History of the Sikhs, etc. were 
proscribed. 

These extremist activities brought him under the 
vigilant eyes of the Yard. In London in the broad 
day light Sir Gurzon Willie was murdered and an 
Indian youth, Mr. Madanlal Dhingra, who used to stay 
in Savarkar’s India House was accused of the crime. 



393 


A public meeting of some of the Indians, including 
men like Sir Aga Khan (now His Highness) and others 
was held to condemn the murder but when the resolu- 
tion, condemning in strongest terms the murder com- 
mitted by Dhingra, for reasons political, was proposed 
and seconded, the President instead of putting it to the 
audience hurriedly declared it unanimously passed. 

Even while the words “Unanimously passed” 
were on the lips of the President, a youthful but deter- 
mined voice rose, “No! no! not unanimously”. The Pre- 
sident wanted to hush and brow beat and repeated 
“unanimously”. “No” ! the protest rose again. 

Mr. Bhavnagari and Sir Aga Khan angrily shouted 
“Who is that ! Where is he !” The Anglo Indians rushed, 
the Indian leaders cast wrathful looks to find out 
the dissentient voice. “Where is he ! Who is he ! What 
is his name ?” a hundred angry enquiries rose and in 
their midst came back the voice, “It is me and here am 
I; my name is Savarkar”. The very sight of Sietvarkar 
made some tremble for consequences. “Kick him, down 
with him I” rose the cry. In the melee a Eurasian 
rushed forth and dealt a heavy blow on Ml^. S^varkar’s 
face. His glasses broke and wound caused near his eye 
profusely bled. But unmoved, with face washed red 
in bloodj he raised his right haind and emphatically 
but all thei more calmly repeated, “In spite of all 'this 
I ^till vote againaS/ th^resOtatibh”. 



394 


The sight of their bleeding leader exasperated the 
revolutionists as never before. One of them took 
up his revolver. With an unerring eye, Mr. Savarkar 
detected it and signed to him to put it back, Another 
revolutionist rushed forward and with a ‘lathi’ broke 
the head of the Eurasian who had assaulted Mr. 
Savarkar. He too profusely bled and reeled back to 
his seat. The Eurasian who had assaulted Mr. 
Savarkar and had his head split in consequence, 
wrote a letter in the ‘Times’, a few days after, to de- 
fend his action and bragged of being proud for having 
dealt “a genuine British blow”, although himself being 
a Eurasian he was only half British. But there soon 
appeared in the ‘Times’ a rejoinder which reminded 
that Eurasian of that “straight Indian Lathi” that sent 
the British blow reeling and bleeding back. 

The British GovernmeDt tried their best to impli- 
cate Mr. Savarkar in the affair as a co-accused, but 
there being no substantial evidence he had to be 
left off. 

While these events were happening in England, 
the Government in India was carrying on relentless 
persecution of the circle of Mr. Savarkar’s family 
&nd friends. 

In the meantime Collector Jackson was shot dead 
by one Kanhere at Nasik. H« was said to be a 
member of the secret society that Itlr. Savarkar had 



395 


founded before he left for England. It was alleged 
that the revolver that he used was sent by Mr. 
Savakar. 

From England Savarkar went to Paris for a time 
but there he learnt that a warrant for his arrest was 
issued in England. Despite the advice of his friends 
to the contrary, he at once returned to London in 
March 1910, but was arrested and taken to India as a 
‘dangerous slate prisoner.’ 

The steamer carrying him to India anchored at 
Marseilles. Taking him to be a dangerous and 
reckless prisoner, the guards neglected no precaution 
and kept him under the most rigorous isolation and 
watch. How he tried to escape from the steamer and 
his guards is an event which displays a heroic fortitude 
that would raise the prestige of the Indian revolution- 
ary party in the esteem of all mankind. 

With ‘now and never’ in his heart Savarkar asked 
his guards to take him to the c^loSet. The door 
of the water closet was set up with a glass-pane to 
get the inside movements reflected on a looking glass 
placed outside it. Savarkar entered the closet, saw 
the port hole at the top a little opened, threw his 
dressing gown on the hook against the , inside pane 
and jumped out of the port-hole below into the 
deep and foaming sea. The guards broke the door 
and fired shots at him. Savarkar dived under water. 



396 


He swam and reached the French coast. The guards 
were after him. Savarkar attempted to get the 
protection of the French law entitled to a political 
prisoner and offered himself to a French policeman 
who handed him over to the British guards. For the 
time being his romantic complication formed the 
foremost topic in the world-press. ‘La Humanity’ and 
other French papers and leaders moved heaven and 
earth in France. The French Government demanded 
him back but the Britishers refused to deliver him. 
The issue was referred to ‘the Hague’, the highest 
International Court which decided against Savarkar. 

In India too a Special Tribunal was set up to try 
his case. The trial was a memorable one. Savarkar 
openly refused to recognise the authority of the 
British Court as he deemed himself under the pro- 
tection of the French law. He was sentenced for 
fifty-five years for waging war against His Majesty’s 
Government. He was sent to Andamans where 
he remained for 14 years. He was, afterwards, 
brought to Ratnagiri where he was interned for the 
nej^t fourteen years. It was only on May 10, 1937 
that he was set free. 

Ilis release was hailed with national joy in every 
part of India. 

I’or a while it remained a mystery as to which 
political party he w# to join. The Socialists did their 



397 


best to win him over. The extreme Congressites tried 
their utmost to prevail upon him to join the Congress. 
All sorts of temptations tind offers of the highest 
position in the parties were made to him. His 
old comrades, the Hindu Sabha leaders were watching 
the developments seriously. But never before did 
Vinayak Damodar Savarkar more fully deserve this 
proud title conferred on him by his countrymen in 
grateful rememberance of his services and sacrifices 
than when ho refused to give up his independence of 
thought and to be caught up by the Congress mass 
hysteria. Few can imagine the amount of pain felt 
by this valiant fighter for the freedom of his Mother- 
land in finding: himself unable to join the popular 
chorus of ‘‘Mahatma Gandhi ki Jai”. What could 
have carried a more intense appeal to him than the 
battle cry of those who are supposed to work for the 
liberating of the Mother from her bondage ? But 
Savarkar wants to gain freedom for the Hindusthan 
that he knows. What avails that freedom which can 
be got only after Hindusthan is converted into 
Pakistan. 

Such is the man who took over the Presidentship of 
the Hindu Mahasabha at Ahmedabad in Dec. 1937. 
The Hindu world has again given the great patriot 
the highest honour at its disposal by electing him 
once again the President of the Nagpur Session of the 



398 


Hindu Mahasabha. He brings back into politics the 
principles of Shivaji, the great. Under his leadership 
the Mahasabha will march from strength to strength. 
That Veer Savarkar should be available to lead the 
Hindu world at a time when the rights and interests 
of the Hindu community were being progressively 
sacrificed at the altar of doubtful political expediency 
reminds us of the great saying of the Lord in Gita. 
“ Whenever Dharma is in danger, I appear; Ob Partha, 
not only for the rescue of the good but for the destruc- 
tion of the evil as well.” 





THE HINDU YOUTH MOVENIENT 


IN HIHDUSTHAN 


Tbe yoaoic Hindus in Hindustban find themsel^uf aurt 
rounded by societies and organisations which appeal ^ 
them for their allegiance* Uncritioa) as their young minds 
are, they are easily influenced by propaganda which is loud 
and which appeals to their emotions- Indeed {ew me# 
escape from the grip of the atmosphere about them« It 
catches them befoie they can sift and analyse the ideas 
which fly about them. The Congress philosophy at present 
dominates the mental climate of Hindnsthan, at least so far 
as Hindus are coneerned. The young Hindus evidently cannot 
keep themselves safe from this climatic domination. 

ITS ORIGIN and early HISTORY 

Taking into ocmiidsration ths sad plight ia which our 
young men are being drowned every day and the helpless* 
ness of our cider insUtiitions to oreate.an impression upo# 
tbsm* a few ycungmen gathered in LidscHre in IRaSeseund 
Slifi Hbai Pannanandii to got inspiration an# lead itosdhimi 
They formed themeolvee iatn crgmiisatlw #r|deh was 
styled as *‘The Order of the Hindu Youths.’’ TldO) afi tu r 
only two years^ was changed into “The Central Hindu 
Yuvak Sabha’^ with its Head Office at Lahore* 

The chief cbjeot of this orgaulsation hue always been 
and witi ever he to orgaidse tha ^Hindu Youth Movf* 


402 


ment’ in Hindusthan and to carry the meaaaKe of ^Bfisdn 
Nationalism’ to the Hindu masses, especially to the youn;; 
iftiepi iMUn on lncdonnt of iMr Ignoirii^e." 

It cannot be oaid/ that before the formation of this Youth 
Organisation there neTer existed any other Hindu Youth 
Organisation, either in the Punjab or in any other proyince of 
Hinrdtitfthan, but it cannot be denied that this was one of the 
first organisations which began to function under the 
patronage of thh Punjab Provincial Hindu Sabha, Lahore. 
In IdBo it was recognised by the Akbil Bharatiya Hindu 
Mahasibha as the premier Hindu Youth Organisation in 
fiKndustlian. 

Outside the Pup^b, an Impetus to the Hindu Youth 
Movement was given by Sjt. Dr N* D« Savarkar in the 
province of Mabaraatra. In 1929, he presided over a 
Maharastra Provincial HLindu Youth Conference held at 
Akola. Again in 1938, another All Maharastra Hindu Youth 
Conference was organiicd at l^oona by Sjt. d. V. Ketkar, 
Sjt. O. lit Nalited ani others nf Pobnaand was presided 
over kf Sjt. Dr. fiedgewir of Nagpur. A Urge number of 
delegatee ffOm alt the lowne of Ifabaraslra participated in 
ik Be^^s a eery large amnber of dieMnguished leaders, 
Swatanftra-Veer Bar. V. D. Savetkar, l^resident ol the 
Ahhfil ilwrilljra ffindn ^ Mahaiabha patli^ipiled in ilg 

ftiE PIBST,ALL INDIA CO^SIERENCE 

^ Centr^J Hwdij,Yp^ 



408 ‘ 


well at abroad. The fitat Conference which wae orjcaniaei 
by f| was the Frontier Punjab Hindu Youth Conference faeM 
under the Presidentship of DharamTir Dr. B. 8. tioonje 
at Lahore in 1931. Delegates and students froiu the Punjab 
and the North Western Frontier Province joined ft in lerge 
numbers. The second Conference which the Central Hindu 
Yuvak Sabfaa organised was the 1st All India Hindu ’ 
Youth Conference bold at Karachi In 1932, under the 
Presidentship of Shri Bhai Psrmanandji. The chief organiser 
of the Conference was L. Tirath Ram Talwar of Karachi, the 
then Secretary of the Order of the Hindu Youths, Karachi* 
It was a very successful session. Delegates from almost all 
the provinces of fiindusthan participated in it. Besides 
other prominent leaders, Shri Baba Sahib Ganesh Damodar 
Savarkar joined its deliberations. 

THE 2ND ALL INDIA CONFERENCE 

The Second All India Hindu Youth Conference waa 
organised in Lahore in 1936 which met under the Presi- 
dentship of Shri Dr. Radha Kumud Mukerji of the Lucknow 
University. Shri Prof. Dewan Cband Sharma and the 
writer ( Mr. (ndra Prakash ) were the Ghairman and General 
Secretary of the Reception Committee reapectiv^y* Aflmost 
all the leader! of the Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahetabha 
participated^ in it Delegates from all parts df Hindufthan 
attended it. 

ITS publications 

Of all the mellioda open to the organishri of the Central 
Hindu Tuvak Sabha to influence young Hindus, it hes not 



404 


appeftled to emotionB or bate molivea, m is the wont of 
mnee ipovemeDta* It bee on the other heed taken up 
intelieelual weapons and baa appealed to Binda Yoobk 
ipen by way of reasoned argument and coatinoing logic. 
So the teak of propagating the fundamental principles of 
the Hindu National Movement was more vigorously per* 
formed by publications of the writings of those leaders 
who were considered to be the pioneers of the Hindu Move* 
men! in Hindusthan. 

^be Sabba has brought out the following publications, 
which were sdtd at cheap rates or distributed free of 
charge throughout Hindasthan and abroad: — 

^Khiakt-i*Hafdir ( The ideas of Dr» Hardayal in Urdu. ) 
by Sbri Dr. Hardayal. 

^Hindo National Movement’ by Sbri Bbai Parmananda. 

*Bir Bairagi’, by Sjt^ Indra Prakash. 

^Youths, Pause and Think’ by Sbri Bbai Parmananda. 

'Bir Banda’, in Gurmukhi, by Swaml Swatanlrananda. 

"Dangers Ahead’ by Shri Bhal Parmananda. 

"^Whlther Hindu Todlha^ by Sbri Bhat Parmananda. 

"The Story of My Life’ by Bhrt Bhai Parmananda. 

^The Position of the HIndut In the Puture Constitution’. 
^Hlindu Sangathan’ by Shrt Bbai Parmananda. 

*Thn Spirit of Yonthe’ by Dr. Badhalumud Mnker^. 

"Hinduism’ by Prof* Dewan Chand Sharma. 

"Hindu Nationalism’ by the late figla iiijpat Rtf. 

/Se|f Abnegation in Politico’ by the late R. B. IgU 

Chlgid. 



406 


^Reprint of the Presidential Address of Shri Veer Saver- 
kar, delivered by him at Ahmedabad, in Enelish end 
in Urdu’ (By its brench at Amritsar). 

^Htndutva’ by Shri Ve«r V D Savarkar. 

PRESENTATION OF BHAIJFS PORTRAIT 

Ob the occasion of the Idth Session of the Akhil 
Bharatiya Hindu Msbasabha held in Lahore in Oct. 1936i 
the Central Hindu Yuvak Sabha, presented a full size 
portrait of BFai Parmanandji^ prepared at the cost of Ks. 
200/* to the Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha for the 
Hall at New Delhi 

ITS BRANCHES AND ALLIED INSTITUTIONS 

Besides the 23 branches of the Central Hindu Yuvak 
Sabha in the Punjab and in the United Provinces it has 
also some branches and Hindu Youth Ors^anisations Outside 
the Punjab which work in full co-operation with the Central 
Body They are The Order of the Hindu Youths Karachi, 
The Hindu Yuvak Sangb, Nagpur, The Naujawan Sabha, 
Sukkur; the Hindu Youth League, Madras; The Maharastra 
Provincial Hindu Youth League. Poona; The Hindu Yuvak 
Sabha, Peshawar and The Hindu Yuvak Sangh, New Delhi. 
Even in Mauritious ( Africa ) and in Nepal it has its 
organisations and workers. 

From September 1938, the Head Office of the Central 
Hindu Yuvak Sabha has been shifted to the Hindu Mahasabha 
Bhawan, New Delhi for the purpose of further centralising 
the Hindu Youth Movement in Hindusthan. 



m 


THE 3RD ALL INDIA CONPERENCR 
Sbri Ntth PraAAd Varma is now oricaniaiu^ the 

Third Session of the All India Hindu Youtli Conference at 
Nagpur in Dec. 1938, which is to meet under the I’resident- 
sbip of Shriman^h Khastria Jagatguruji. 

Prof. Dewan Oband Sharma of the D. A. Vk College, 
Lahore is the President and the writer (Ur. ladra Prakash) 
is the Oeneral Secretary. 






The word “Shuddbi’’ ia understood still by many 
people to mean a movement for conversion to Hindu- 
ism of only those that were once Hindus but were 
subsequenty converted to another faith. But the word 
was never intended to possess that limited or restricted 
sense. It implies the admission to the Hindu fold also of 
those who were never originally Hindus but seek for the 
first time to come into that fold, There are some who 
attribute some sinister designs to the movement. They 
must know that Shuddhi or proselytism is not a modern 
conception in the land of Aryavarta. A great dis-servise 
has been done to the Hindus by the thoroughly mistaken 
view held by some of its leaders in the immediatf^ly 
preceding centuries that only a Hindu by birth was a Hindu 
and hence conversion was altogether ruled out. They 
forget that the virile Vedic Brahmins could penetrate any 
part of the world and purify it with the touch of their 
Sanatan Dharma so as to make it fit for habitation of civiliz- 
ed people. Whatever they touched they purified and made 
serviceable both to minister to their personal comforts and 
the conveniences of their lives as well as to facilitate their 
civilising mission. Not very long ago Lord Buddha preach- 
ed for the whole of the human race and within His fold 



410 


there conld come every human being to whatever race or 
country he belonged. Kabir, Guru Nanak, etc* followed him 
and preached in the same strain. Sbri Guru Govindsingh 
gave an organised shape to a religion which sprung from 
Hinduism and is based on the same cardinal principles as 
Hinduism. Swami Dayanand Saraswati in recent times 
gave a strong impetus to the idea. The idea of Sbnddbi 
has therefore no connection with recent political movement. 
We see, therefore, no reason why those who strive for 
political advancement should call upon us to give up a 
movement based on an idea first conceived in the Land of 
Aryavarta centuries ago, before Christianity or Islam came 
into existence. Sbuddhl is nothing else but proselytism 
and it passes our comprehension why the right of conversion 
enjoyed by all other religious communities in the land 
should be objected to and denied to Hindus. The idea of 
proselytism is pre-eminently our heritage and this is why the 
Hindu Mabasabha has been concentrating its attention to 
the work of Shuddhi. For some time Hindus bad grown 
passive and were not very anxious to convert aliens to 
Hinduism, nay, they bad even declined to re-admit into 
their fold those who bad gone out of us due to their 
ignorance and our indifference. But ceaseless and deter- 
mined attempts on the part of Christians and Mnslims to 
deplete the ranks of the Hindus by all kinds of ways could 
not be tolerated by the Hindu Mabasabha leaders who 
bave always stood lor Hindu rights. In recent years Hindu* 
Muslim riots and the Mopla rebellion have opened the 
eyes of even those who were thought of as extreme or* 



411 


tbodox. Many Hindu Institutions, quite independent of 
Hindu Mabasabba, have come into existence and have 
undertaken the Sbuddhi work in sheer self-defence. These 
have brought; back to Hinduism the Hindus who were intimi- 
dated into accepting Islam. The Sbuddhi work has accord- 
ingly been pursued by various Institutions ( Arya Samajas, 
Hindu Asbramas, Sbuddhi Sabhas, All India Ksbatri Sabha, 
etc.) under various designations throughout the length and 
breadth of India. In 1928 Swami Sbraddhanand entered 
the field of Sbuddhi. His work was carried on with serioue- 
ness, zeal and devotion on such a large scale that it created 
an unnecessary flutter in the dovecots of Muslim leaders and 
many of the Hindu Congressitea who in season and out of it 
follow them. But the work of the great Swami went on 
undeterred and it infused a n^w life-blood into the timid 
veins of the Hindus who had grown very terrified by 
the Mnslim-riots and Mopia atrocities. Organised attempts, 
however, from the side of the Muslims were sought to be made 
on the lives of the Hindu leaders. Even the greatest of 
the Muslim nationalist leaders are said to have encouraged 
such ruffians. A cowardly attack was made on the precious 
life of the great Swami who fell a victim to their shots and 
gave up his life at the altar of Sbuddhi. But his martyr- 
dom made the Hindus all the more active and many dozens 
Associations, deriving inspiration from his glorious death have 
been doing tremendous work in the fleld of Shuddhi. The 
Malkana Rajputs have been reconverted. Thousands of Chris- 
tians have been brought to the Hindu fold. Orphans, helpless 
women, and children, are daily rescued by these Associations 



412 


from the missionaries of alien faiths. So for as the rescue 
of the babies and Ablas is concerned, the greatest and 
best organized institution in India is the Hicdn Abla 
Ashram and the Childern Home in Calcutta which is 
governed by a most representative holy of Calcutta with Sjt, 
Babu Fad am Raj Jain as its General Secretary. 

In the field of Shuddhi, His Holiness Shankaracharya 
and even orthodox leaders such as Pandit Madan Mohan 
Malaviya have given proof of their strength of mind and 
great practicil wisdom by taking active part in this sacrr d task 
of conversion. Very recently the reconversion of Rajkuinar 
Seetaman to Hinduism at the hands of Pandit Madan 
Mohan Malaviya is an event the importance of which is 
colossal enough by itself. 

Here below our readers will find some of the figures 
denoting approximate number of persons coDveiied or 
reconverted to Hinduism with those rescued from tb^ 
elutcbes of the missiooariis of the alien faiths. The figures 
have been taken from the recoids and reports of the various 
reclaiming Institutions ( Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Shuddbi 
Sabha, Dayanand Salvation Mission, Dalitoddhar Sabhss, 
Hindu Sabbas, Hindu Abla Ashrams, Hindu Missions, Arya 
Samajas, Sbri Masurkar Mabaraj’s Ashramas and other 
Suddbi Sabhas). The number represented here is, in our 
opinion, much less than actually what it Ought to be, as we 
have not been able to gather full informations from the institu- 
tions engaged in Shuddbi work, However, it oan speak 
volume of the earnestness of our workers who have reali ed 
the gravity of the situation of the Hindus in every province, 



413 


thougb it caD reliably be said that the number of reconvert- 
ed is entirely insignificant and falls shorty if compared 
with that of conversions to Islam or Christianity by Tablig- 
Jamayats or Christian Vfissionariea in British India and 
Indi n States 

It is hoped that the full significance and importance of 
the movement would be realised by the Hindus more and 
more as the time advances. The instinct of self-preservation 
in the Hindu cannot no«7 fail to react. Happily wisdom 
is dawning upon our nation and in the daily conversions 

a^ destined fulfilment of the original purpose can be 
discerned. 

REPORTS OF RECLAIMING INSTITUTIONS 
PUNJAB 

OTSLIMS XTIAXS. RESCUED TOTAL 

Dayananda Salvation 
Mission Hoshiarpur 
1927-1937 

Dayanand Dalit Ud- 
dhar Mandal 
1926-1937 

DELHI & U. P. 

All India Hindu 
Shuddhi Sabha 
Agra and Delhi 
1923-1938 

Arya Samaj (College 
Section) 

New Delhi 


11121 87353 205 98679 

89660 ... ... 89660 

227000 ... 228 227228 

1 ... .SO 81 



414 


RAJPUTANA 

MUSLIMS 

XTIANS. 

RESCUED 

TOTAL 

Ajmer Hindu Sabha 
19234937 

40000 

• •• 

700 

40700 

Bharafcpur,_ Alwar, 
Beawar^ Targar 

10000 

* « « 

3 

10003 

MAHARASHTRA 

Hindu Sabha Arya 
Samajas 

Is agar, Nasik, Cbalis- 
gaon, Jalgaoa 

894 



894 

Pandarpur, 

Dhawangaon 

6 



6 

Hindu Dharma Math 

712 

• 99 

154 

866 

Ratnagiri Hindu 

Sabha 

150 

250 


400 

Dig Raj Arya Samaj 

1 

... 

... 

1 

Nasik Hindu Sabha 
19314938 

5 

... 

10 

15 

BIHAR 

Akhil Bharatiya 
Sharddhanand Trugt 
upto 1937 

665 

• •• 

• • • 

665 

BERAR 

Hindu Sabha 

603 



603 

Sharddhanand Trust 
19304937 

31 

• • • 


31 



415 


MUSLIMS XTIANS. KKSCtTED TOTAL 


Bharatiya Hindu 
Bliarma Math 
1928-1988 

120 

60 

170 

850 

BOMBAY 

Hindu Sabba Dadar 

44 

2 


46 

Arya Samaj Dadar 

... 

2 


2 

Arya Samai Bombay 
1927-1988 

89 

196 

898 

628 

Bombay Hindu 
Missionary Society 
1917 1924 

150 

121 


271 

Paundharpur 

Hindu Sabha 

2 


20 

22 

Lonavala Hindu 
Sabha 

2 



2 

Poona Hindu Sabha 

1 

... 

... 

1 

ASAM 

Hindu Sabba 

1927-1987 

382 

72 

867 

811 

CALCUHA 

The Hindu Abla 
Ashram & Babies 
Home 

1924-1986 



3900 

8900 

Hindu Mission 

1925-1937 

1943 

2942 

150,000 

154886 



416 


BARODA 

MUSLIMS XTIANS. BESCUED TOTAL 

Bombay Provincial 
Hindu Sabha, 

Arya Kumar Sabha 
Hindu Sabha 


Kareii 

112500 

86000 

20(X) 

200600 

NAGPUR 

Hindu Saiiha 

1935-38 

212 

36 

1800 

2047 

KARACHI 

Hindu Rescue Home 

Association 

1936-1938 



37 

37 

MALABAR 

Arya Samaj 

3600 



3600 

DECCAN STATES 

Kolhapur Hindu 
Sabha and 

Arya Samaj 

1023 

1246 

2000 

4268 

Miraj & Sangli 
Hindu Sabha 
upto 1937 

36 

• • • 

2 

88 

Total ... 


8,41,090 





THE RESULT OF THE EFFORTS OF SHRI MASUKAR 
MAHARAJ IN VARIOUS PROVINCES 
IN HINDUSTHAN. 


SHUDDHI 


From 1928 to 1938. 


Satara District. 

Berar, Khandesh, Bombay 
and Karnatak Etc, 
Conversion of Eoyal family in 
Satpura States. 

(Punjab) Abbotabad, Nowshera, 
Tehri, Bhatinda. 

Kashmir 

Greater Maharashtra 
Musar Ashram 

Total 


10.000 Nearly all were 

Christians. 

1.000 Christians and 
140 Mohammedans. 

1,000 

16 Mohammedans. 

n n 

11 

11 11 

11 11 

20206 


12 

1 

190 

7847 


PROTECTION GIVEN TO FALLEN ONES 


Punjab — Tehari and 4/5 
villages nearby. 


1,290 Saved from conversion 
to Islam 



418 


Kashmir — Uddyarapur 


8 Saved from conversion 
to Islam 
300 

2o «• «* 


Nepal 300 ,, „ 

Khasol 25 „ „ 

Gwalioi — Mandosar 600 ,, ,, 

U.P. — Prayag, Kumbha Mela 1500 Saved from conversion 

to Christianity. 

Bengal — Datan (Calcutta) 10 ,, „ 

Sindjh — Sadhubela 20 Saved from conversion 

Nara 1 to ^fohninmedanism. 

Berar 25,000 Saved from the clutches 

of Mohammedans. 

Satara-^Satara 350 Saved from conversion 

Nandre 2,000 to Christiaeity. 

Kokan 250 „ ,, 


Satara — Satara 
Nandre 
Kokan 

Vasai — Vasai 
— 'Talagri 
— Nirmal 

Multapi-^ Baitul part. 


Vadhapani 

Dound 

Eaipur 

Shendurjana 


1,500 

4,000 

Protected some Jungle 
tribes. Number not avail- 
able. 

1,500 Protected some jungle 
tribes. 

75 Protected some Harijans 
8('0 Saved from being converted 
160 Saved from conversion, 


39529 



Founded in 1937. 


The BhoQsala Military School is lor the present thd only 
lostitiition of its kind, particularly for the boys of the 
middle classes^ 

Inspired by the philosophy of realism, Shri Dr. B. S. 
Moonje got round a few people of bis way of thinking and a 
Society was established and later on duly registered, which is 
called the CENTRAL HINDU MILITARY EDUCATION 
SOCIETY. The principal aim of the Society which has 
eetablished and is conducting the School, is the realisatioa 
of the old Vedic Law of education : — 

i 

It means that, along with the training of the mind and 
the deveiopmeot of the intellect, the body also should be 
equally developed and training in the Science and the Art 
of personal and national defence should also be imparted. 
This Sanskrit couplet is succinctly translated, as if it were, 
by Sig. Mussolini by his dictum-^'^The Book and the 
Eifle.’^ In other words, the object of the Society in establi* 
shing this School is to make it a feeder school to the 



420 


Indian Military Academy at Dehradun, so that it may be 
one of the Inatitutions envisaged by Field -Marshal Sir 
Philip Chetwode providing for the constant supply of a 
really first class material for recruitment of Officers in the 
Indian Army. 

Besides this immediate objective, the ulterior aim is to 
bring about the Military rejuvenation of the Hindus; so 
that the artificial distinction of Martial and Non^Martial 
classes amongst the Hindus may be eradicated and the 
Hindus may be enabled to supply soldiers for the defence 
of their homeland in the same proportion in which other 
communities can, which are not so caste-ridden. 

The Governing Body of the Society which is directly 
responsible for the conduct of the School is composed of 
such leading and influential men as the Hon’ble Mr. Jayakar 
the Federal Judge, the Home Member and the Army 
Member of the Government of Gwalior, Sriman Pratap 
Seth who has given a donation of a Lac of Rupees, Beth 
Mathuradas Vasanji Kbimji, Col. Kukday, Sir Govindrao 
Pradhan,, Mr. N. C. Kelkar, General Shinde of Baroda, 
Bardar Angria of Gwalior, and others. 

FINANCES OF THE SOCIETY. 

tipto now about Rs. three Lacs and fifty thousand have 
been promised as donations. About Rs. three Lacs have 
been realised and the rest are being realised and further 
more donations are being canvassed. The donation of Es. 
one Lae of Pratap Beth has been converted into a percna* 
nent Endowment Fund which brings a yearly income of 





Rs. 4,000/- by interest. H. H. the Mnharaja of Gwallor^tf 
donation of Rs. one l^ac is at present invested in Govern- 
ment Security Bonds. About Es. one Lac has been spent in 
the construction of 5 Dormitaries which provide accomodation 
for 100 boys, a School-Building, a Kitchen-Building with a 
Dining Hall of 90X20 ft, providing accomodntion for 
150 boys sitting together for meals on benches, and other 
Ancillaries. 

• NAME OF THE SCHOOL. 

The propriety of naming the school as the Bhonsala 
Military School is this. The name Bhonsala does not 
appear to be generally known in Northern India; but to us 
in the Maharashtra, the name is most sacred. It is the name 
of the family in which was born a great personage, Shri 
Shivaji Maharaj, who delivered this land of ours from the 
foreign rule of the Moghuls and revived Hindu Imperialism. 
GENERAL SCHEME OF THE SCHOOL. 

The School is strictly and entirely residential and is a 
kind of Military Gamp with strict discipline prevailing. 
The whole course of Physical and Military Training is 
compulsory for ail boys. It comprises the following:-^ 

1. Physical Training, both indigenous and western, 
such as Soorya Namaskar, Physical Exercise on western 
system, organised games such as Hockey and Football, 
Swimming and life-saving, horse-riding, indigenous arts of 
self-defence such as wrestling, 'lathi’, sword, spear, etc* 

2. Military Training comprising Rvfle-shooting, training 
of selected boys in competitions of Rifle-shooting, Squad 



422 


Drill, Arms Drill, Musketry, Platoon-commaod, Company 
command, etc. 

8, Periodical Lectures on Elementary Military organi- 
sation and administration, 

Besides such Physical and Military Training, the School 
gives Book- education like any of the High Schools recognised 
by the Government and prepares boys to appear for the 
Matriculation Examination of the Bombay University. The 
first batch of boys from this School will appear for the 
Matriculation Examination in 1940. The School has 
already secured Government recognition. To serve the 
convenience of boys coming from different Provinces, speaking 
different Provincial languages, the general medium of 
instruction is English, but special arrangement has been 
made for teaching Sanskrit, Marathi, Gujarati, and Hindi, 
for the present. 

Age of admission ranges from 10 to 16 years. No boy 
is allowed to appear for Matriculation Examination from 
this School who shall not have passed through the compulsory 
course of Physical and Military Training, having resided in 
the School for at least two years. 

The Uniform Dress of the boys of the School is of two 
kinds, one for the Drill parade and another far the P. T. 
parade* For the Head-wear, solar hats are in daily use for 
Drill-parade and on the Play grounds. 

THE GESERdiL KITCHEN AND THE CANTEEM 

The genera! kitchen of the School is strictly and entirely 
vegetarian; but aeeparate provision far Canteen has been 



423 


made, where refreshments, both vegetarian and noa- 
vegftarian, are available for purchase by boys as they desire. 

Caste distinctions are not observed in the School. All 
boys, to whatever caste they may belong, are, on admission 
to the School, regarded as belonging to the Kshatriya Varna 
and are treated as such in daily routine. All boj s sit down 
together for dining in the general Dining Hall on benches 
and tables without any caste distinctions, what*8o>ever. 

SCHOOL-PEES. 

Admission fee is Rs. 5/ and the School fees are Rs. 25/- 
monthly for the first three classes and for the 4l'b, 5tb, 6tb, 
and 7th classes the fees are Rs. 80/ monthly. These 
fees provide for board, lodge, and tuition, including medical 
relief for ordinary indispositions. Extra fee of Rs. 8/ per 
mnnth is charged for training in Horsemanship, 

No Military School can be self-supporting on such low 
rates of fees but we know that parents of Middle classes 
cannot afford to pay higher fees. These rates of fees have 
been fixed on taking into account the average expense a boy 
has to undergo for studying for the Matriculation Examination 
in any ordinary High School, where a boy has to live away 
from borne, and has to pay for bis meals in a decent Hotel. 
OUR HOPE. 

We start with the conviction that our fighting men, 
speaking impartially and without passion or bias, do not 
lack in the ardour for fight, or courage, or dash, or leader- 
abip, but it is equally a fact that, without the training in 
the European methods of warfare or their modern imple- 



424 


meets of warfare, their fightiog virtues do cot yield the 
results that they ought to, in proportion to the courage or 
dash or the casualties they suffer in warfare. 

This Military School of the Central Hindu Military 
Education Society is intended to be an attempt, however 
rudimentary it may be, at removing these defects: so that 
oar boys may vie with British boys on battle-fields without 
the inherent handicap of conciousness of inferiority either 
in their training or in their implement of warfare. 



RASHTRiYA SWAYAMSIWAK 
SANOH 


Tbi8 is an Akbil BhAratiya Orjranisation started by Dr. 
K. B. Hedgewar, L. M. S. at Nagpur, on the auspicious day 
of Vijaya Dasbnii in 1925, with a handful of young enthusi- 
astic workers. 

The aim of the Sangh is to protect the Hindu race, 
religion and culture and consquently to achieve all sided 
progress and regeneration of this ancient Hindu Nation. 
The Central idea is to infuse the spirit of collective life 
among the Hindus irrespective of caste, creed or profession 
and to transform the latent strength of the Hindus into a 
great nation building force. 

The actual plan of work adopted for this purpose was to 
organise a net work of branches of the Rashtriya Swayam- 
Sewak Sangb throughout the length and breadth of the 
country which naturally creates a sort of self-confidence 
and a national will among the disintegrated Hindu popu- 
lation. The plan has wonderfully succeeded and now 
within the short period of thirteen years no less than three 
hundred branches have been established with an aggregate 
membership of about forty thousand. These branches are 
spread throughout Hindi C. P., Marathi C. P,, Berar and 
Bombay Presidency and recently a vigorous beginning has 
been made in the Punjab and the United Provinces. 



426 


For creating uniformity of programme and for giving soli- 
darity to the working of all tbe Sangh branbces that are 
already in existeniSe and also with the object of training 
coxxlpetent organisers for starting new Sangh branches in the 
untouched areas, an Officers’ Training Camp is annually con- 
ducted at Nagpur, Poona and Lahore, for a period of about 
forty days in Summar. 

The daily programme for every Sangh branch is very 
and greatly interesting. All tbe members assemble in the 
evening for an hour or so and undergo various kinds of 
physical and military training, besides which devotion to 
the ideal of voluntarily merging one’s individuality in the 
greater and fuller life ol^ tbe nation is created and fostered 
by moral instructions. In addition to these daily programme 
they also observe certain ceremonies, i, e. Guru Poornima, 
Baksbabandhan, Yijaya Dasbmi, Makarsankrant, and Gudhi 
Fadwa, etc. and also arrange various military camps, trips 
and outings with all tbe discipline and spirit befitting tbe 


occasion. 




The question of cow-protection has always been a 
concern of vital importance with the Hindus of Hindusthan. 
This sacred sentiment of the Hindus towards cow-protection 
also played '*a substantial part during the days of Muslim 
rule in India. 

Whenever the Hindus organised themselves and fought 
against the foreign dominations there used to be only 
three main factors which caught their imagination and 
appealed to their sentiments — Dharma Desh ^ and 
Cow Our Saviours, Shri Shivaji and Guru Govind Singb 
fought for the protection of cows and Brahmans. By Brahman 
they meant Dharma Shri Guru Govind Singh in 

his classic couplet remarked : 

^ ^rsri ‘JT5’ ’3’?^ 1 
JTl'srm ^ ^ |] 

Some of the Mohammedan rulers did care for this 
sacred sentiment of the Hindus and even the Bmperor 
Aurangxeb prohibited cow-slaughter n various places, 
like Muttra, etc. In the days of the East India Company as 
well this sentiment was respected^ They also prohibited 
cow*slaughter at Muttra. 

Ko sooner did a wave of consciousness sprang up among 
the Hindus ol Hindusthan they thought of oow-protection 



428 


Early in the 20th century associations for cow-protection 
were organised and we find from the record that the 
first Conference of an all-India nature was held at Calcutta 
in December 1917, under the presidentship of the Hon. 
Sir John Woodroffe, Judge of the Calcutta High Court. 

In December 1918 the second session of the all India 
Cow Conference was held in Delhi under the presidentship 
of Shri V. Vijiaraghavaeharya of Salem, Madras. The Chair- 
man of the Reception Committee was the Hon. Shri 
Sukhbir Singh, the then General Secretary of the All India 
Hindu Mahasabha. A large number of delegates and 
visitors from all parts of India attended the Conference, 
prominent among those were the late Mahatma Hansraj of 
Lahore, Pandit Din Dayal Sharma, Pandit Satya Charan 
Shastri of Calcutta, Kumar (now Sir) Jagdish Parohad and 
R. B- Jamna T^al (now Syt. Jamna Lai Bazaz — a well-known 
Congress leader ). 

These deliberations resulted in the formation of various 
Provincial Organizations. Besides the religious point of 
view, Cow-protection was also considered from economic 
stand point specially for Hindusthan which is predominantly 
an agricultural country. 

The 3rd Session of the Conference was invited by the 
representatives of the Bihar Province. It was held at Patna 
in April 1920, which was presided over by Justice Sir 
Asbotosh Maker ji of Calcutta. Many prominent and distin- 
guished gentlemen from all over Hindusthan graced the 
occasion with their presence, A move for the enactment 
of Cattle Preservation Act was made in this Conference and 



429 


the attention of the Governraent was drawn for the necessity 
of an Act for the prevention of cruelty to animals. 

Gradually the movement assumed a local shape in every 
province and district in India. Large number of ^goshalaa’ 
and Pinjrapoles were established and the Hindus 
took upon themselves to finance them throughout the country. 

Almost all the Hindu lieligious Associntions (Sanatan 
Dharina Sabhas, Arya Samajs, Jain Societies, etc) took up the 
cause and included the cow-protection in their programme. 
Special associations like that of Go Rakshani Sabhaa were 
also established, 

The Hindu Mahasabha too embodied this item in its 
programme. We find from the rocord of the Akbil Bbartiya 
Hindu Mahasabha that at the time of its 5th Session held at 
Delhi in 1918 under the Presidentship of the Plon. Raja 
Ram pal Stngh one of the important resolutions was for the 
stopi^age of eow'killing in Hirdusthan. 

Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya, as the President of the 
Hindu Mahasabha, to(.k keen interest in the movenaent of 
cow-protection. Long before the arrival of Lord Linlithgow 
who as the Viceroy gave great impetus to Cow Protection 
and cattle breeding, Panditji organised Gonchar 

bhomis (grazing grounds) on large scale for the cows, spe- 
cially at Muttra and other holy places. 

In aln.ost all the sessions of the Hindu Mahasabha. we 
dad a lively interest taken by the members of the Maha 
Sabba in this vital question so much so that at the Lahore 
Session of the Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahnsabha, this 
tentiment of the Hindu public rose so high that a very 



430 


strong resolution for the stoppage of Cow-slaughter at 
Muttra was passed 4 

In the Province of Maharashtra Sbri Chounde Maharaj 
has done wonderful work in this direction. He has organised 
a net work of Go-Rakshni Sabhas throughout the provinces. 
Special Cow Conferences were also organised by him at 
various stfssions of the All India Hindu Mabasabha. 

It is through the lively interest of the Bihar Provincial 
Hindu S»bha that the Nepal Government was approcbed 
some years ago to grant some pieces of land for the grazing 
purpose in the adjoining districts of Nepal near Bibari 
The Nepal Government have given large pieces of land 
for this purpose 

In 1937 the Government began to construct an abattoir 
tinder the name of *Cold Storage^ in Lahore Cantt. The 
local Hindu Sabha somehow or other was apprised of the 
intention of the Government and started a strong agitation 
by at once memoralising the Punjab Government and the 
military authorities. The agitation started by the local Hindu 
Sabha was soon taken up by almost all the Hindu societies in 
the Punjab, The Hindus at once made it an all India question, 
There were strikes (hartals) and demonstrations of protests 
against the Government throughout India. It was proposed 
to launch a civil disobedience campaign and the Hindu 
Sabha leaders like Sbri Bhai Parmananda, Dr. G'^kal Ghand 
Harang and others in the Punjab volunteered themselves to 
kad the first batch of Satyagrahia. The Government at 
last had to yield and the construction of the abattoir was 
given up. 



431 


For the last two years the cow-slaughter at various holy 
places and particulailj? at Muttra, the sacred birth place 
of Lord Krishna is attracting the atteut'on of the Hindu 
Mahasabha and it is believed that some practtcsl steps 
would be taken very soon to get this wrong undone. 

In protecting cows and Brahmans every great Hindu 
reformer aimed at winning true Svaraj^a. But today it is de- 
plored that owing to the wrong and suicidal lead of the Indian 
National Congresp, there is a new India before us that asks 
the Hindus to give up their ancient culture and adopt 
instead new ideas of patriotism wherein there is no place 
for cow. There is no item in the Congress programme of 
Swarajya for cow-protection. Very recently even Mr. 
Rajgopalacbarya, Premier of M»»draa, wlio was not ashamed 
in boldly asserting that the Congress Government has not 
placed any restrictions on cow-alaughter in bis province. A 
Bihar Congress leader has also in a statement exhorted the 
Hindus to permit and allow their Muslim brethern to 
slaughter cows anywhere they like. It is proposed that a 
Legislative measure permitting the cow slaughter will soon 
he placed on the Statute book in the province of Bihar. 

The Hindu Mabasabbaites shall fight this growing spirit set 
on foot by the Congress till the last drop of blood in them. 



THE HIIINDU SEWA ASHRAM 


For soire tinie past it has been seriously felt that a 
sta^je has been reached in the work of nation buildinj^ in 
Bindusthan when to save this dying race of the Hindus in 
their own land and to create Hindu Consciousness amongst 
them, the devoted labours of a specially trained agency ap])- 
lying itself exclusively to the task of Hindu Sanghatan Move- 
ment, in a true missionary spirit, are requried. And it is 
more befitting for the Hindu ifahasabha to organise 
a separate ini^titulion which should train some of the Hindu 
Young men to devote their lives to the Hindu cause. 

Shri Bhai Parmanandji was thinking for the last so many 
years of establishing a “Hindu Sewa Ashram^’ and for this 
object in view he proposed to devote all that he had. This 
Scheme is now being completed. In the beginning he wanted 
to start the Asbram at Lahore, Rai Bahadur Lala 
Sewak Ram (son of the late SirGanga Ram) requested him 
to found it at Lahore by the side of the Ravi Canal for which 
he was even prepared to give free land. Prominent Hindus 
of Delhi wanted Shri Bhaiji to open the Ashram in Delhi 
as it had become the Capital of India. The latter sugges- 
tion prevailed and he decided to start the Ashram in Delhi. 
For sometime he had been selecting certain sites for building 
the Ashram, but eventually he applied to the Government for 
the grant of land on lease on the Reading Road. The 



433 


flinda Mahasabha Head Office was situated since its very 
establishment in a small rented house on the Panchkuin 
Road which did not befit the position and the status of the 
Akhil Bharatiya Hindu Mahasabha, The land was therefore 
taken on lease for three definite purposes viz. Ashram, Hindu 
Sabha Head Office and Quarters. 

In 1933 Shri Bhaiji became the President of the Maha 
Sabha. He placed this Scheme of starting an Ashram before 
the Working Committee which was welcomed. 

A palacial building has now been constructed. For the 
construction of the Ashram building Shri Bhaiji collect- 
ed about Es. 20,000 and for its maintenance he donated, 
at the Ajmer session of the Hindu Mahasabha, his 100 
shares of the Punjab Sugar Mills which were then of the 
market value of Es. 35,000 with an annual income of Es. 
4,000. He has created a trust which includes besides 
him, Shri Seth Jugal Kishore Birla, Eaja Narendra Nath, 
Dr. Sir Gokal Chand Narang, Lala Narain Dutt, the President 
of the Hindu Mahasabha and a few others. 

The Ashram building haying^ l^jen completed, its charge, 
control and management was handed over by the Hindu 
Mahasabha to Bhai Parmanandji. The opening ceremony of 
the Ashram was performed by Rev. C. Vijiaraghavachariar 
of Madras in the presence of distinguished gathering which 
included Dr. B. S. Moonje, R. B . L. Moolraj and L. Narian 
Dutt, etc in the first week of April 1935. 

There are at present two weekly Journals, “the Hindu 
Outlook,’’ and “the Hindu” (ffindi) besides a Press of their 



434 


own. These Journals are the only mouthpieces ol the policy 
and the activities of the Hindu Uahasabha. 

Shri Bhaiji himself intends to reside as a Banaprasti 
in the Ashram along with the workers who would be trained 
for the Hindu Sabha work. 

The whole Scheme of the Ashram can only be successful 
if there are sufficient funds at disposal. Shri Bhaiji is now 
being pressed to tour some of the foreign countries 
to collect at least Rs. 5 lakhs to enable him to find out and 
maintain some young men who will devote their lives 
for the Hindu cause and the Hindu Mahasahha. 

The Ashram will be similar to that of “Servants of India 
Society” Poona. 



?r*rr ^ff^S’wrm ^JTt<r^- 

«j3tj ?srcnE?i ^ w'l^l’ f^^- 

?:t? 5^ ^iiJTi fc'i Jifww 

w -3^^ 1 1 



*T^T^r»n % «T?risq ^ | — 

« grnt ^ «?:% if 

«*n^ I 

^ 3rft 3r^ anw^^riT ^ «iTit ^?rt 

?^T ^?:HT I 

*T «Rl»?rqT «T fSrWRW «K5TT «k if f 

^Ct ^^fsTtoft ^ hvfk «Bt I 

^ f|j^-srf0c9r % «rTT^' ?f gsiwf^cT «5i:^ gr«rr 
^ «iiir ^rsn I 
5F ilTr^^T ^i?€rif<?T «<5If I 
^ ^ # 3if (^T wk kr^ 

% f9^ ?n»«f^^t ^ 

?«n«Rr %^«Tf if »nw ^wsn » 

^ fwJT ^ *1^ 

srfiig fTJTr I 

n firofirfr fei^t ^ «Rt«r «Ri«rrar4f 

?r«n «r^mT9wf ^ ?«m^ i 



437 


?i«rr €\ qt^jjr 

% ^T«r^?r«P ^«n?T i 

sf % f|^, 3|fT'^ 3Twr €riTh«f^'t «mj>t 

^ ^?;mw g^qsr sj>»m, ^ 

«et ^ ds ^ h5t% 
«w ftra?rr* ^T ^ri?^ I 

% Jn»i|t if ^- 

5er?Tf^ 4t wrf^ ?it 5ff»Jr^i?T «bt q^qw q* fq^tqr 
5T 5? ^w%q i 



II II 

S|% 

vr!^?i^j^ ( ff ^sfR ) 

go^ifpT I; cisrr q?w<^ «iT»fi*n?rT ^?su?; 

€t wT3c?ir ^ «%fi «»gT i h 

?r«n ?i¥?i?iT «ET pgq- irq®;? 

I^> %q--iTin^ 

^ m, «rq^ *t «ff qni?ft 

«»qs» ?i;t-h 5 i-«r ^ ^n: srq^Ji- 

^sr Tfm I 

qrifiq;gr« — qf^r 'snsn i Or%q 


^mw- 
» 5 i;T 5 n»r- 
« 5 EI w 

m — 


«T» 9 ft 





II II 

^w??rm5TT J!mTq[ I 

s^lrfflT 35lF«a ^TTflTsf 

^ flRra |fT?5i #r«qt 

;Ti?r?J^ I 

^.'JS ?5r «P5r filSHT ! 

e?: i 

% ^1% mgftr^rwvr! 

snftjBt wF^t gift# figr^ gift# iTTg?:^ 
§fti Fg?n gfg w»4 

gfti §Fir W 

ff sfiiTTi: I 

gi|^ gfir HI ^F^ 

gftr ?Ti »tFcb 

g'^Tift sft^n n% ?iF??^ i 
gf ^ §;Tri’ ^^s^jjrgTft# 

«HT9T «*T5I ?qT ftfflft# 

gi# Fg?ir 

aiTiftr 5gr «i;t^ ^igsri §wr wg?:q' i 
«?;5rr gFwgr ijfgar *ng?:q[ i 

g?^ig<q; I 




PUBLISHED BY 

THE AKHIL BHARATIYA HINDU MAHASABHA 


AND PKINTED BY 

SYT. INDRA PRAKASH 

AT THE HINDU MISSION PRESS, BEADING ROAD, 
NEW DELHI. 




